---
label: "143"
title: "Fragment of a Mosaic Vessel with Floral Motif"
layout: entry
order: 441
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-143"
---

## Condition

Single fragment, broken all around.

## Description

Concave fragment, probably from a bowl. The exterior is undecorated, a translucent purple appearing black. On the interior five florets are randomly placed on a translucent purple (appearing black) background. In addition, one white curved stem is visible. Each circular floret consists of a central red rod surrounded by eight elongated white petals set in purple.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique see comments on [85.AF.85](#num). On the trade of small fragments of mosaic glass in nineteenth century Rome and on the different techniques and classes of mosaic glass present in the JPGM collection, see comments on [76.AF.70.21](#num).

This fragment belongs to a class of vessels ascribed to late first-century BCE Egypt, known as Egyptian Cast and Inlaid Bowls ([[Grose 1989]], p. 197). The vessel was formed by slumping a single-colored matrix of glass, on whose surface inlay elements were added, forming a decorative pattern on the surface of the vessel. A fragment of a very similar vessel from Karanis, Egypt, is in the Kelsey Museum in Ann Arbor, Michigan. It is a broad shallow bowl with flowers and wading birds ([[Cool Root 1982]], p. 17, plate 18e). Further parallels from Fayum, Egypt, preserving parts of the depictions of birds, garlands, and loosely arranged stars and rosettes, are published as well ([[3000 Jahre Glaskunst]], p. 41, no. 36, color table F 4= [[Christie’s 1985]], pp. 116–117, no. 225). Another example, a shallow bowl of almost-opaque medium blue glass with floral decoration, is kept in the Toledo Museum of Art ([[Grose 1989]], p. 208, no. 227), and few more are now in the Corning Museum of Glass ([[Whitehouse 2003]], pp. 128–130, nos. 1099–1103).

## Provenance

1983, Jiří K. Frel, 1923–2006, donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1983

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None