---
label: "165"
title: "Cylindrical Box, Pyxis"
layout: entry
order: 527
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-165"
---

## Condition

Partly complete, lid missing; body reassembled with large fills; numerous cracks; surface pitted.

## Description

Straight, vertical, unworked rim; cylindrical body with horizontal ribs at top and bottom; flat bottom. Mold-blown zone of eight alternating upright and inverted palmettes, each with seven leaves. The upright palmettes have thick out-turned leaves and the inverted palmettes have thin curling-up and -inward leaves. Four relief concentric circles and a central recessed boss decorate the base. The upper ridge was holding the lid, which, judging by other fully preserved examples, was conical with cylindrical unworked rim. A few splashed yellow blobs, marvered flush, on the bottom and around the body.

## Comments and Comparanda

On splashware, see comments on {% cat '2003.293' %}. This particular cylindrical box is referred to by the ancient Greek term “pyxis,” which essentially denoted all lidded small boxes made of precious and plain materials, glass among them ({% cite 'Hilgers 1969' %}, pp. 265–267). They were used to hold medicines, cosmetics, and magical ingredients ({% cite 'Hilgers 1969' %}, pp. 265–267, no. 308). The glass pyxides were ideal as containers, neither contaminating the contents nor absorbing them. They are all mold-blown, and although they all are decorated with rows of palmettes, subtle differences in the motifs distinguish four variants in details, such as the spacing between the palmettes and the plasticity of the leaves ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 169–170). This particular vessel belongs to the most populous variant ({% cite 'Kern 1954' %}, pp. 34–35, fig. 7; {% cite 'Matheson 1980' %}, p. 48, no. 125; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 69–172, nos. 79–82; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001b' %}, pp. 32–33, nos. 500, 501; {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 127, nos. 125, 126, also in {% cite 'Israeli 2011' %}, pp. 62–65; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 76, no. 75). For examples of the other variants, see {% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 67, no. 61 variant 3rd; {% cite 'von Saldern 1980b' %}, p. 50, no. 42. Two examples from Pompeii indicate that the form was in vogue before the destruction of the city by the eruption of the Vesuvius in 79 CE ({% cite 'Scatozza Höricht 1995' %}, p. 81; {% cite 'Kern 1954' %}, pp. 34–35). The decoration evokes contemporaneous silverware ({% cite 'Oliver 1977' %}, pp. 136–137, nos. 87, 88: Boscoreale saltcellar; dish from Trinquetaille, pp. 132–133, no. 84).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, pp. 158–159, no. 444.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)