---
label: "534.1"
title: "Face Bead"
layout: entry
order: 2157
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-534-1"
---

## Condition

Intact

## Colors of Upper and Lower Parts

Red

## Base Mass

None. The back side of the mosaic sections is visible. In the hole the bands appear to have been added onto the central band, which is dark-colored.

## Faces: Number and Outline

Four Medusas. In white, not angular, roundish outline.

## Additional Plaques

None. The faces are partly deformed and not perfectly aligned. The red coil on one end is imperfectly wound, permitting us to see that it was wound on the blue band with the imbedded face florets. The other red coil is partly covered by two of the faces that appear to have “sagged” over it. 

## Description

The necklace consists of 29 irregular globular mosaic face beads and one face pendant. Around the central part of each bead are mosaic florets representing female faces that in most cases alternate with florets with geometrical patterns, arranged in a band. This central band is framed on top and bottom with a wide colored band of glass. Beads 1–4, 8–15, 18–19, 21–28, and 30 have a vertical thread hole that tapers slightly upward. Beads 5–7, 17, 20, and 29 have a vertical thread hole that tapers slightly downward.

## Comments and Comparanda

On mosaic face beads, see comments on {% cat '78.AF.324.1' %}. For dating see {% cite 'Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994' %}, pp. 410–413, nos. 149–153; {% cite 'Maeda 2001' %}, no. 105. For another green pendant, but with faces set in red squares, see {% cite 'Sangiorgi 1914' %}, no. 254; {% cite 'Sangiorgi Collection 1999' %}, lot 81: <https://www.christies.com/lot/lot-1519732?ldp_breadcrumb=back&intObjectID=1519732&from=salessummary&lid=1>.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 126, no. 334; p. 120, plate no. 334.

## Exhibitions

None