---
label: "269"
title: "Amphora"
layout: entry
order: 781
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-269"
---

## Condition

Intact. Incrustation on the interior and especially around the handles and rim on the exterior.

## Description

In-folded, tubular rim; conical mouth; cylindrical neck, constricted at its base; long, conical body tapering toward the bottom; flat bottom covered by a circular pontil scar (approx. 1.2 cm in diameter), seemingly solid. No decoration is visible on the body. Two vertical, coil handles are applied at the shoulders and attached midway up the neck.

## Comments and Comparanda

Small glass amphorae rendering in miniature the shape of large clay amphorae were quite popular and were used as tableware for serving wine. This vessel belongs to a distinctive group of Syro-Palestinian table glass amphorae, appearing in four different types, which have been dated to the fourth and fifth centuries CE ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85). The tall, tubular neck, constricted at its base, led us to ascribe this vessel to type III. In particular, on the basis of its long, conical body, the presence of a base, and the absence of a decorative coil halfway down the neck, it is ascribed to type IIIB1b ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85, fig. 3). The findspots indicate that these vessels may have been produced in Palestine, possibly beginning in the first half of the fourth century CE: {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 37, type 10.6 (variant). Also cf. {% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 131, no. 164; {% cite 'Bomford 1976' %}, no. 164; {% cite 'Oliver 1980' %}, p. 124, no. 218; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 146–149, pp. 210–211, nos. 100–101.

## Provenance

1935, George Dupont Pratt, American, 1869–1935; 1935–1937, Estate of George Dupont Pratt, American, 1869–1935 [sold, Anderson Galleries, New York, January 15, 1937, lot 61]; 1940, Harry Leonard Simmons [sold, Parke Bernet Galleries, Inc., New York, April 5, 1940, lot 136, through French & Co. to J. Paul Getty]; 1940–1976, J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, upon his death, held in trust by the estate; 1976–1978, Estate of J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, distributed to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1978

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Anderson Galleries 1937a' %}, lot 61, ill.

{% cite 'Parke-Bernet Galleries 1940' %}, lot 136, ill.

## Exhibitions

None