---
label: "337"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 882
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-337"
---

## Condition

Intact. In some areas a black crust in the interior.

## Description

In-folded, tubular, flaring rim; short neck; ovular body compressed at four spots along its greatest diameter, thereby acquiring an irregular polygonal shape. Stands on a concave bottom. No signs of pontil mark are visible.

## Comments and Comparanda

A well-known form ascribed to the production of fourth-century eastern workshops is the group of relatively small flasks with tubular, in-folded rim and a very wide, short, cylindrical neck leading to a pear-shaped body that almost always bears four indentations that render the body squarish ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 100–101, no. 28; {% cite 'Barkóczi 1988' %}, p. 151, form 131; {% cite 'Roffia 1993' %}, p. 108; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, p. 133, form 102). Analogous items have been located in the following sites and museums: Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto ({% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, pp. 39, 66, plate 12, no. 153); Mainz ({% cite 'Harter 1999' %}, pp. 104, 246, form D21b, no. 726, plate 30); Syria: Bosra ({% cite 'Dussart 1998' %}, p. 92, form BVII.2423, plate 18); Israel: Samaria ({% cite 'Crowfoot 1957' %}, p. 409, no. 5, fig. 94/5); and Jordan: Mahayy ({% cite 'Dussart 1998' %}, p. 92 n. 7).

The flask was acquired with a leather-covered lidded basket, and both are part of a group of miscellaneous objects once associated with a painted wood sarcophagus ([JPGM 82.AP.75](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/object/105Z1T)). The absence of sediments on the glass vessel and the shape of the basket, which does not correspond to that of the flask but quite faithfully renders a first-century mold-blown pyxis like {% cat '2003.315' %}, suggest that they were not an original assemblage.

## Provenance

1982, Galerie Nefer (Zurich, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None