---
label: "197"
title: "Unguentarium / Grape Flask"
layout: entry
order: 589
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-197"
---

## Condition

Intact.

## Description

Rounded, fire-polished, flaring rim; cylindrical neck with tooling marks. The body is in the shape of a trilobed cluster of grapes and is covered with 12 rows of large hemispherical knobs imitating grapes. Formed in a bipartite mold; vertical seam hardly noticeable among the knobs on the surface.

## Comments and Comparanda

Mold-blown vessels in the shape of wine grapes are a relatively widespread flask form, and they appear in three distinct periods of Roman history. The oldest examples reproduce the bunch with greater naturalism, as in this vessel and {% cat '2003.330' %} ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, p. 94, form 78e; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 142–143, form 118); they appear as early as the third quarter of the first century and continue into the early second century, and it has been assumed that they are Syro-Palestinian products ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 180). The later examples are dated to the end of the second century, and render the grape more schematically. Two-handled examples appear particularly in the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire—probably locally produced there—in addition to the handleless variant that prevails in the east ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 108–109, form 91a; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 190–191, no. 119, with detailed bibliography). Finally, there is a third subgroup comprising vessels with body modeled like a grape bunch standing on a discoid base. They are mainly found and were probably made in the Syro-Palestinian region, and they are ascribed to the third century on the basis of stylistic features ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 191–195, nos. 120–128). Other comparanda include the following: {% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 108–109, form 91a; {% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 72, no. 71; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 190–191, no. 119; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 125, no. 630; {% cite 'La Baume and Salomonson 1976' %}, p. 38, no. 76, plate 8:4; {% cite 'Moirin and Arveiller-Dulong 2010' %}, pp. 215–217, figs. 3–4.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 173, no. 473.

## Exhibitions

None