---
label: "365"
title: "Amphoriskos"
layout: entry
order: 943
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-365"
---

## Condition

Intact. Iridescence and white layer of weathering.

## Description

In-folded rim; conical mouth; cylindrical neck wider toward the body; squat globular body; flat bottom, standing on an applied base-ring. At the center of the bottom, an annular pontil mark (W. 2.2, Th. 0.1 cm) is visible. A thick trail of glass is wound around, forming a ring at the middle of the neck. A pair of coil handles are applied on the shoulders and stretch to mid-neck height, where they bend and attach to the neck and the decorative trail. The surplus of the coil is folded over the upper surface of the handle.

## Comments and Comparanda

Small glass amphorae rendering in miniature the shape of large clay amphorae were quite popular, used as tableware for serving wine. This vessel belongs to a distinctive group of Syro-Palestinian glass table amphorae, appearing in four different types, which have been dated mainly to the fourth and fifth centuries CE ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85). This particular vessel, due to its funnel mouth and tubular neck without a constriction at its base, is ascribed to type I, which is dated between the mid-third and mid-fourth centuries CE. Among the vessels of this group the shape of the body varies greatly. On the basis of its free-blown, squat spherical body, the presence of a base, and the presence of a decorative coil halfway down the neck, this example is ascribed to type IB3a ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85, fig. 2; {% cite 'Dusenbery 1971' %}, p. 24, fig. 39; {% cite 'La Baume 1973' %}, D94, plate 38:4). Quite similar but with conical base are the following parallels: {% cite 'Platz-Horster 1976' %}, p. 60, no. 110; {% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85, type IB2a, fig. 2; {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 262, no. 343; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 142, no. 196.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 227, no. 665.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)