---
label: "573"
title: "Medical Pipe"
layout: entry
order: 2251
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-573"
---

## Condition

Intact; interior covered with iridescent, milky white weathering, which is also visible on areas of the exterior.

## Description

A biconical object. Formed as a vessel with in-folded and flattened rim; slightly flaring, short, cylindrical neck; biconical body, with lower part considerably longer; convex bottom. An oval opening on one side near the bottom; the rim of this opening was somehow cut and mildly fire-rounded. Around the vessel at its largest diameter are four indentations. The back side of the opening in the lower part is round, making it impossible to keep the opening facing upward should the vessel be left without a support.

## Comments and Comparanda

No direct comparanda have been found, but the color and the overall shape of the vessel indicate a late antique production period, e.g. fourth–sixth centuries CE. Possibly used to pour some liquid in a controlled manner, especially if the holder sealed the vessel’s mouth with their palm or finger. The large size of the opening compared to the small size of the vessel makes it difficult to understand its use.

## Provenance

1908, Arnold Vogell, 1857–1911 (Karlsruhe, Germany) [sold, Griechische Altertümer südrussischen Fundorts aus dem Besitze des Herrn A. Vogell, Karlsruhe (Versteigerung), Max Cramer, Cassel, Germany, May 26–30, 1908, lot 978]; by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Cramer 1908' %}, lot 978.

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 213, no. 613.

## Exhibitions

Gläser der Antike: Sammlung Erwin Oppenländer (Hamburg and Cologne, 1974–1975)