---
label: "286"
title: "Bird-Shaped Flask"
layout: entry
order: 804
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-286"
---

## Condition

Broken and mended in different places. Some weathering has produced iridescence, and incrustation around the outside of the mouth; several pinprick bubbles. Rim is reconstructed by some resin.

## Description

Cylindrical neck; bird-shaped body. The pressing marks of the pucellas used to shape the vessel are visible on the tip of the tail. Originally blown as a globular flask, it was manipulated while still hot and malleable to produce the desired shape.

## Comments and Comparanda

Very similar to baby feeders (guti) (see {% cat '2003.381' %}), except for the sealed end in this flask type. This is a small and simplified version—with its simple, pinched bottom—of a relatively well-known form of askos (a wineskin in ancient Greek, that is, a container for wine made of animal skin) (see comments on {% cat '2003.383' %}). Several parallels for this particular form of flask with trefoil rim are known ({% cite 'Froehner 1903' %}, no. 813, p. 117, plate 128.1 [now Metropolitan Museum of Art 17.194.134: <https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/249378>]; {% cite 'Dusenbery 1971' %}, p. 17, no. 19; {% cite 'Canav 1985' %}, p. 39, no. 24; {% cite '3000 Jahre Glaskunst' %}, no. 203; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, pp. 121–122, nos. 188–189).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 205, no. 575.

## Exhibitions

None