---
label: "281"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 793
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-281"
---

## Condition

Cracked; fully preserved; iridescent. Parts of the neck are covered with crust. Some of the ornamental thread is missing.

## Description

Fire-polished, vertical rim; cylindrical neck, constricted toward the body; globular body; flat, slightly concave bottom. Three thick coils are wound around the central part of the neck at equal distances. A fine thread is spirally wound eight times around the central part of the neck and over the three coils.

Inside the body four thin tubular threads descend from the lower body to the shoulder. Three of them remain detached at the lower part of the body. The threads were made with the insertion of a pointed tool into the lower part of the initial {% def 'paraison' %}, creating a tubular opening that would end at the inside surface of the shoulder. With further expansion of the vessel the tubular hole would assume the shape of a thread.

## Comments and Comparanda

The shape of the rim and neck are characteristic of sixth- and seventh-century Syro-Palestinian products, as are the applied coils and threads ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 263), all features appearing in this vessel. For the classification of this type of vessel, see {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 43, type 15.22. Provenanced finds include a vessel from an archaeological context of the second half of the seventh century CE at Kourion, Cyprus ({% cite 'Young 1993' %}, pp. 44, 47, fig. 8, no. 9); another reportedly from the vicinity of the Sea of Galilee ({% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 128, no. 158). At least three unprovenanced examples have been published ({% cite 'Bomford 1976' %}, p. 34, no. 159; {% cite 'Harden et al. 1968' %}, p. 90, no. 125; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 263–264, 266, 268–270, 302, no. 165; {% cite 'Harden et al. 1968' %}, p. 90, no. 125, British Museum).

## Provenance

1971, Royal Athena Galleries (New York, New York), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1971

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Lees-Causey 1983' %}, p. 154, fig. 3.

{% cite 'Wight 2011' %}, pp. 63, 70, fig. 46.

## Exhibitions

None