---
label: "233"
title: "One-Handled Cup / Modiolus"
layout: entry
order: 712
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-233"
---

## Condition

Mended; small body parts are missing.

## Description

Fire-polished, flaring rim; partly lopsided, conical mouth; bell-shaped body; pushed-in, tubular ring-base; flat bottom.

A thick white thread is applied flush on the rim. The body is covered with widely spaced light blue, white, and a few yellow specks, giving the impression of a mosaic vessel. A massive, ridged strap handle made of undecorated dark blue glass is attached on the body and on the mouth area, bent to form a wide ring.

## Comments and Comparanda

Modioli, a type of relatively wide and deep, one-handled cups, were a quite widespread form of vessel in the late first–early second centuries CE ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 52–53, form 37; {% cite 'Haevernick [1978] 1981' %}, pp. 367–374). Literary sources and pictorial testimony indicate that modioli were used as drinking cups, although the name is a diminutive of modius, a measuring vessel ({% cite 'Hilgers 1969' %}, pp. 67–68, 224–225). Most examples have straight walls and bodies that are cylindrical or conical tapering toward the ring-base, like {% cat '78.AF.31' %}. A folded tubular flange in the form of a figure eight at the transition from the vertical body to the rim is often present, but not among the JPGM examples. A single wide, circular strap handle is attached to the upper part of the body. The form is considered a western, probably Italian, product, but it is not uncommon in eastern parts of the empire as well. Several variant shapes have been identified, like this bell-shaped vessel, which suggest that modioli were produced in a number of workshops. For direct comparanda of this vessel, see {% cite 'Kunina 1997' %}, pp. 149, 291, no. 185; {% cite 'Whitehouse 1998a' %}, pp. 42–43, no. 101; {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, p. 295, no. 875; {% cite 'Lazar 2003' %}, p. 58, fig. 19. In general for colored modioli, see {% cite 'Haevernick [1978] 1981' %}, pp. 372–373.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite '*JGS* 1972' %}, p. 153, no. 9, ill.

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 139, no. 390.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)