---
label: "123"
title: "Mosaic Bowl"
layout: entry
order: 407
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-123"
---

## Condition

Mended.

## Description

Vertical, slightly everted, rounded rim; deep body with convex sides tapering toward the flat bottom. A fine incised horizontal groove in the interior right below the rim.

The vessel is made of discoid mosaic tesserae of a single type composed of fine white rods (possibly 11) surrounded by translucent dark blue glass. Most tesserae have been fused almost vertically, probably as a result of the movement during the action of the slumping technique, so that the white rods appear elongated as short, wavy white threads in the dark-colored body of the vessel.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique, see the comments on {% cat '85.AF.85' %}. On the different techniques and classes of mosaic glass present in the Getty collection, see comments on {% cat '76.AF.70.21' %}.

For particular parallels, see the following: {% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, p. 328, no. 546, ill. p. 233 (one of the two types of tesserae of that bowl is the one used exclusively in this vessel, that is, blue ground with numerous opaque white rods); {% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, p. 330, no. 560, ill. p. 234, which is a shallow bowl with golden-yellow ground with white rods, the same concept in a different color (in addition, this bowl has in the interior three narrow, horizontal incised grooves: two in a band at the junction of the side and bottom, and a small one at the center of the bottom). For a ribbed bowl of the same-color mosaic tesserae, blue with white rods, see {% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, p. 277, no. 285.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his daughter, Ingrid Reisser, 1988; 1988–2004, Ingrid Reisser (Böblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2004

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 115, no. 310.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)