---
label: "431"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 1104
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-431"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved; heavily weathered.

## Description

Fire-polished, slightly in-turned, vertical rim; wide, cylindrical neck, severely constricted at its base; horizontal shoulder; biconical body with larger and slightly convex upper part and smaller and concave lower part; conical, folded base-ring; concave bottom. At the center of the bottom is the scar (W. 0.8 cm) of a solid pontil. The vessel is slightly lopsided. The tip of the rim is topped with an opaque green trail. On the neck and body from rim to base are incised about 22 horizontal bands (0.4 cm wide) composed of fine incisions, leaving void bands 0.4 cm wide. A zigzag pattern is visible around the bottom of the neck.

## Comments and Comparanda

Probably the zigzag pattern, or rather the small triangles between which the zigzag is now visible, was covered with some substance, such as gold foil, that left the surface under it smooth and unaffected by the weathering that has covered the vessel in general. Note the traces of gilding in the incised lines of two of the six deep-blue, ninth-century plates found in the crypt of Famen Temple (Famensi) in Shaanxi Province, China: {% cite 'An 1991' %}, pp. 123–124, figs. 3–8; compare {% cite 'Michaelson 1999' %}, pp. 158–159, no. 115.

For an opaque red vessel with very similar body shape dated in the twelfth–thirteenth century or later, see {% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, p. 444, no. 661.

## Provenance

By 1911–1924, Frank Gair Macomber, American, 1849–1941 [sold, American Art Galleries, February 27, 1924, lot 42]; 1933, Emile Tabbagh, 1879–1933; 1933–1936, Estate of Emile Tabbagh, 1879–1933 [sold, Anderson Galleries, New York, January 3, 1936, lot 23]; 1940, Harry Leonard Simmons [sold, Parke-Bernet Galleries, New York, April 5, 1940, lot 118, through French and Co. to J. Paul Getty]; 1940–1976, J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, upon his death, held in trust by the estate; 1976–1981, Estate of J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, distributed to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1981

## Bibliography

{% cite 'American Art Association 1924' %}, lot 42.

{% cite 'Anderson Galleries 1936c' %}, lot 23, ill.

{% cite 'Parke-Bernet Galleries 1940' %}, lot 118, ill.

## Exhibitions

None
