---
label: "433"
title: "Miniature Jar"
layout: entry
order: 2002
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-433"
---

## Condition

Intact. There is a little weathering, mostly on the zigzag thread.

## Description

Fire-polished, flaring rim, constricted at the transition to the squat globular body, standing on a slightly convex bottom. A circular scar of a solid pontil (W. 0.6 × 0.4 cm) is visible at the center of the bottom.

The vessel is decorated with a thick coil comprising marbled red, turquoise, and white threads brought around the body in a zigzag pattern (eight times) and around the rim.

## Comments and Comparanda

Similar vessels with thick, unmarvered coil are rare but known: a small bottle made of the same translucent olive-green glass decorated with an opaque red thread dated to the seventh–eighth centuries CE, ascribed to a Syrian workshop ({% cite 'Carboni 2001' %}, p. 41, no. 1.7b); and a flask that is similar in craftmanship, with applied thick coils, dated to the fifth–seventh centuries and ascribed to an Islamic workshop ({% cite 'Musée Curtius 1958' %}, pp. 97–98, no. 212). Very similar thick, globular jars with marvered red and white threads are known from various collections, dated between the fifth and eighth centuries, ascribed to Syro-Palestinian workshops ({% cite 'Oliver 1980' %}, p. 139, no. 240; {% cite 'Platz-Horster 1976' %}, no. 185; {% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 128, no. 388; {% cite 'Goldstein et al. 2005' %}, pp. 42–43, no. 22; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, pp. 212–213, nos. 778). See also comments on {% cat '2003.288' %}.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 247, no. 721.

## Exhibitions

None