---
label: "273"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 785
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-273"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved; small areas of dullness and iridescence. Several visible breaks all over the vessel.

## Description

Cracked-off rim; cylindrical neck, bulging toward the constriction at its base; spherical body; flat bottom. Incised and wheel-cut decoration on body. Eight slanting, elongated incisions around the shoulder area. Eight large, oval, almost circular incisions on the upper body area and six on the lower body form a wide band that is filled with two rows of rice-shaped facets arranged at interchanging heights, forming a loose faceting motif. Six slanting, elongated incisions around the bottom.

## Comments and Comparanda

The vessel is made of decolorized glass, which was much more valuable and expensive than ordinary greenish glass. In Roman times glass decolorized with manganese or antimony appears from the last third of the first century CE until the beginning of the fourth century CE, but it was most in fashion and had its highest distribution levels from the second quarter of the second to the mid-third century. It was used mainly in western Europe and mostly for tableware, although bottles and unguentaria appear in colorless glass as well ({% cite 'Foy et al. 2019' %}, vol. 1, pp. xiii–xvii; {% cite 'Stern 2020' %}, pp. 769–774). This particular flask form appears in the western provinces, on the Black Sea coast, and in Asia Minor, produced in several centers during the third and fourth centuries CE ({% cite 'Foy et al. 2019' %}, vol. 2. pp. 250–252, form IN 250; {% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 121–122, form 103; {% cite 'Fünfschilling 2015' %}, pp. 422–423, form AR 154.1; {% cite 'Antonaras 2009' %}, pp. 190–92, form 50).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, [Erwin Oppenländer](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=28247), 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2004, [Ingrid Reisser](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=18278) (Böblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2004.

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 185, no. 514.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)
