---
label: "129"
title: "Fragment of a Mosaic Glass Vessel"
layout: entry
order: 413
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-129"
---

## Condition

Rim and upper body fragment.

## Description

 The rim is vertical and ground, and the body continues with a mild convex curve, probably a bowl. On the interior, 0.5 cm below the rim, a horizontal groove 0.1 cm wide is visible. The body tesserae compose a checkerboard pattern with rows of opaque green, yellow, white, and red tesserae.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique see comments on {% cat '85.AF.85' %}. On the trade of small fragments of mosaic glass in nineteenth-century Rome and on the different techniques and classes of mosaic glass present in the JPGM collection, see comments on {% cat '76.AF.70.21' %}. This bowl belongs to Roman Cast Composite Mosaic vessels and in particular to the Non-Carinated Bowls group ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, pp. 258–261), which are one of the most numerous groups of mosaic vessels, with deep and shallow bowls being among the most widely appearing forms; others are plates and beakers. The checkerboard pattern is quite rare, and the other published examples are broad shallow bowls with single interior grooves; the pattern is created by tesserae in two or three colors ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, p. 260, nos. 564–567). Known carinated mosaic bowls with checkerboard patterns date this group to the late first century BCE–early first century CE ({% cite 'Abdul-Hak 1959' %}, p. 81, fig. 14; {% cite 'Goldstein 1979' %}, pp. 186–187, no. 497).

## Provenance

Pierre Mavrogordato, Greek, 1870–1948 (Berlin, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 123, no. 332; p. 121, plate no. 332.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)