---
label: "306"
title: "Jug"
layout: entry
order: 831
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-306"
---

## Condition

Intact; areas covered with off-white/beige weathering.

## Description

Flaring rim; short, conical mouth that leads directly to the ovular body. A thick coil is wound once around the lower end of the mouth at the transition to the body. The vessel stands on a flat bottom, where an annular pontil mark (W. 2.5 cm, Th. 0.1 cm) is visible. A strap handle was applied on the body and drawn up to the base of the mouth, covering the decorative coil there.

Body, handle, and the decorative coil are made of amber-colored glass with few pinprick bubbles in it. In addition, the vessel is covered with applied decoration. One white and one opaque red-brick thread are wound nine times around the vessel, from the center of the bottom to the end of the rim. The threads are combed on body and neck, forming festoons.

## Comments and Comparanda

The same decoration of a fine red trail dragged to form festoons appears on vessels from the Syro-Palestinian region from the fourth up to the eighth century CE; see comments on {% cat '2003.289' %}. The dark translucent color and the thick walls of the body connect it with jars dated to the seventh–eighth centuries (e.g., {% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, pp. 194, nos. 940–941). For other parallels, see {% cite 'Metropolitan Museum of Art 1930' %}, p. 111 (not illustrated), a jar (acc. no. 29.100.89.) dated to the fifth century CE or later: <https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/253001>; {% cite 'Platz-Horster 1976' %}, pp. 92–93, nos. 183–186, flasks in different shapes and an amphoriskos dated to the fourth–fifth or seventh–eighth centuries CE; {% cite 'Oliver 1980' %}, p. 139, no. 240, globular jar dated to the seventh–eighth centuries CE; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, pp. 212–213, nos. 777–778, a bottle dated to the fourth–fifth centuries CE, and a jar dated to the fifth century CE, or later; {% cite 'Carboni and Whitehouse 2001' %}, pp. 136–137, no. 53, a cylindrical bottle ascribed to Egypt or Syria; the same in {% cite 'Carboni 2001' %}, pp. 296–297, no. 75a, dated to the eighth, possibly early ninth century CE.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 138, no. 386.

## Exhibitions

None