---
label: "427"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 1100
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-427"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. Repaired break between neck and the body. Lifting, flaking resin/adhesive on neck interior. It is likely that the neck and body come from different objects. Iridescence, pitting, and incrustation on both the exterior and the interior.

## Description

Fire-polished, vertical rim; cylindrical neck with six horizontal constrictions on its upper part; mildly sloping shoulder; short, cylindrical body, curving in at bottom; slightly concave bottom. A circular mark of a solid pontil (W. 0.8 cm) is visible at the center of the bottom.

## Comments and Comparanda

In general small, plain, undecorated flasks with relatively long neck appear in several variants, with globular, squat, ovoid, and even biconical body, dated between the ninth and eleventh centuries. Sites with relevant finds include Fustat ({% cite 'Scanlon and Pinder-Wilson 2001' %}, pp. 38–39, fig. 15-f; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, pp. 43–44, no. 659); Beit She’an ({% cite 'Hadad 2005' %}, pp. 39, 158–159, nos. 691–292); Abu Skhair, Iraq ({% cite 'Negro Ponzi Mancini 1972' %}, nos. 3–6); Sabra al-Mansuriyya, Tunisia ({% cite 'Foy 2020' %}, pp. 62–65, type Sb1, fig. 27).

Small flasks with globular or squat, cylindrical body, and neck with consequent constrictions are quite well-known, dated between the late eighth and the eleventh centuries. See examples from Fustat, Cairo ({% cite 'Scanlon and Pinder-Wilson 2001' %}, p. 47, type 20a–i and in particular 20f, with the same body shape as 79.AF.184.32; {% cite 'Shindo 1992' %}, fig. IV-6–14:26–31). Another probably Egyptian flask is in the Corning Museum of Glass ({% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, p. 66, no. 714). Numerous parallels from Syro-Palestinian sites, and sites in Egypt, Iraq, Iran, the east African coast, Armenia, and Greece are published, indicating the wide distribution these vessels had: Beit She’an ({% cite 'Hadad 2005' %}, pp. 40–41, plate 38, nos. 762–779, wherein exhaustive bibliography); other published sites include Tiberias ({% cite 'Lester 2004' %}, p. 185, no. 95), Yoqne’am ({% cite 'Lester 1996' %}, p. 204, fig. XVIL4:7), Caesarea ({% cite 'Pollak 2003' %}, p. 166, fig. 2:25–26, 28), Nessana ({% cite 'Harden 1962' %}, p. 87, nos. 66–69), Manda ({% cite 'Morrison 1984' %}, pp. 164–167, fig. 134:j), Seleucia ({% cite 'Negro Ponzi 1970–71' %}, pp. 67–71, fig. 50:42), Iran ({% cite 'Lamm 1935' %}, p. 9, pIate 28:F), and Corinth ({% cite 'Davidson 1952' %}, p. 107, no. 684).

## Provenance

1979, Edwin A. Lipps, 1922–1988 (Pacific Palisades, California), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1979

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None