---
label: "174"
title: "Beaker"
layout: entry
order: 546
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-174"
---

## Condition

Mended and filled. Iridescence and area with incrustation.

## Description

Cracked-off, ground rim; conical body; flat bottom. The body is covered with a mold-blown, raised honeycomb pattern of nine rows of embossed oval cells, framed by a smooth band below the rim and another near the bottom, 1.5 cm wide. On the bottom are two raised concentric circles around a central boss.

## Comments and Comparanda

This beaker, on the basis of the body shape, is assigned to a relatively well-represented group of mold-blown conical beakers dated to the first century ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 45–46, form 31; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 103–107, nos. 8–10). A very similar beaker with raised almond-shaped bosses was found in Pompeii ({% cite 'Scatozza Höricht 1995' %}, p. 82, fig. 16c). With regard to the decoration, it is comparable with a truncated conical beaker with pronounced shoulder (MCT VIII) with embossed diamond-shaped bosses, which is ascribed to an eastern Mediterranean production area and dated to the middle to second half of the first century CE ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 110–111, no. 12). The decoration is also comparable with a shorter beaker in the Corning Museum of Glass ({% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 30, no. 497). Marianne Stern ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 111) has proposed that these vessels imitate facet-cut gems, being glass imitations of *pocula gemmata*, gold and silver cups decorated with gems ({% cite 'Hilgers 1969' %}, p. 261, s.v. “poculum”).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 167, no. 458.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2009–2010)
