---
label: "171"
title: "Lotus Bud Beaker"
layout: entry
order: 543
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-171"
---

## Condition

Intact; some incrustation on the interior.

## Description

Rim cracked off; truncated, conical body; base plain, very slightly concave, no pontil mark. Two wheel-incised fine lines just below the rim. Wall decorated with six horizontal bands of eight three-tiered drop-shaped bosses; each row is offset from row above it so that bosses are arranged in quincunx. A horizontal ring articulates the bottom of the vessel above the flattened base. Base decorated with a small central boss, a concentric ring at the middle of the bottom, and a pair of larger rings at the edge of it.

## Comments and Comparanda

This beaker belongs to a large group of vessels decorated with pointed, three-tiered knobs, sometimes with additional motifs such as circular bosses and theatrical masks, occasionally accompanied by linear patterns or vine sprays ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 45–46, form 31; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 103–107, nos. 8–10, with thorough bibliography). Diverse interpretations have been proposed for the knobs: bosses, lotus buds, almonds, or knots in the trunk of a tree. The three-tiered shape with profiled edges, though, can only be connected to an olive tree’s knobs. Hercules’s club was made from the trunk of an olive tree and is represented with prominent knobs in many media, including at least three club-shaped glass bottles ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 107, no. 38). This hypothesis was first proposed by Clasina Isings ({% cite 'Isings 1976' %}, p. 353), and it seems quite logical to associate these vessels with Hercules and some of his virtues, as well as his affinity for endless drinking.

Vessels decorated with tiered knobs have a wide but uneven distribution throughout the Roman Empire and beyond its borders. Examples decorated exclusively with knobs are ascribed to the western part of the Empire ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 104, with thorough bibliography).

Finds from Pompeii and Herculaneum ({% cite 'Scatozza Höricht 1986' %}, p. 19, plate 1, top center; {% cite 'Scatozza Höricht 2001' %}, p. 82, fig. 16a–b) show that these beakers were already in use before 79 CE, when the cities were destroyed by an eruption of Vesuvius, a date that is supported by finds from Switzerland ({% cite 'Berger 1960' %}, pp. 52–54; {% cite 'Rütti 1991a' %}, II, p. 71), the Netherlands ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, p. 41, form 31), and Turkey ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 106 n. 23). It is not clear how long they continued to be used after the late first century, but the latest are recorded in contexts up to the second century. Other comparanda include {% cite 'Whitehouse 2000' %}, pp. 112–113, no. 97; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, pp. 27–28, nos. 492–496; {% cite 'Foy and Nenna 2001' %}, p. 182, no. 305; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 77, no. 77; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 71–72, form 21, with several new finds from controlled excavations in the Balkans, Cyprus, and Black Sea coast.

## Provenance

1985, Robert Haber (New York, New York), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1985

## Bibliography

{% cite 'JPGM Acquisitions 1985' %}, p. 195, no. 67.

## Exhibitions

Ancient Art from the Permanent Collection (Los Angeles, 1999–2004)