---
label: "572"
title: "Pin"
layout: entry
order: 2241
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-572"
---

## Condition

Intact; covered with iridescent weathering.

## Description

Smooth glass rod, circular in cross section, pointed at one end and with a conical head at the other.

## Comments and Comparanda

Glass pins are a rare find. They are similar to so-called stirring rods (see {% cat '2003.403' %}), which have a tiny disk on one end and a vessel or animal on the other, if not bent into a closed ring; almost always their cylindrical shaft is twisted ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 94–95, form 79; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 166–167, form 148). They are even closer to twisted rods, pointed at one end and decorated with a vessel or animal on the other end, identified as distaffs ({% cite 'Gojković 2015' %}, pp. 267–268) and glass needles ({% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 166–167, form 148D).

Glass pins like 2003.404 recall the ancient Greek *kalamis* (καλαμίς) or the Latin *discerniculum*, that is, a long, thin object used by women to divide the locks of their hair when arranging a complicated hairstyle, thereby identifying it with a rare kind of hairpin (*Oxford Latin Dictionary*, s.v. “discerniculum”; Liddell and Scott, s.v. “καλαμίς”). For finds of this type, see {% cite 'Davaras 1985' %}, p. 201; {% cite 'Platz-Horster 1976' %}, p. 82, no. 166; {% cite 'Barkóczi 1996' %}, p. 106, no. 341; {% cite 'Mandruzzato et al. 2008' %}, p. 53, no. 34.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 215, no. 621.

## Exhibitions

Gläser der Antike: Sammlung Erwin Oppenländer (Hamburg and Cologne, 1974–1975)