---
label: "285"
title: "Bird-Shaped Flask"
layout: entry
order: 803
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-285"
---

## Condition

Intact. Iridescence and even black crust cover the interior.

## Description

Fire-polished, flaring rim; trefoil mouth; wide, cylindrical neck; body pulled to form a spout at its end, assuming the shape of a bird; mildly concave bottom. The tip of the tail is open and has been open from the beginning, as its fire-rounded tip clearly indicates. The pouring slit of the trefoil mouth is inconveniently placed over the body, making it difficult to pour the liquid contents of the vessel from there.

## Comments and Comparanda

The actual use of these vessels, known as guti, remains uncertain. There is a testimony in the sources that they were used as baby feeders ({% cite 'Hilgers 1969' %}, s.v. “titina” or “ubuppa,” p. 80), but it has also been proposed that they were used for the filling of oil lamps ({% cite 'McFadden 1946' %}, p. 475, no. 32; {% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, p. 118) or some sort of a drip feeder for medicinal liquids ({% cite 'Welker 1974' %}, pp. 95–98). The more likely hypothesis seems to be that they were used for filling oil lamps, especially clay lamps: their very small filling holes would seem to necessitate the use of a funnel or a spout. However, the obvious discrepancy between the large number of lamps found in excavations and the small number of glass “lamp fillers” does not support this hypothesis unreservedly ({% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 102–103). For parallels with baby feeders (guti), see {% cite 'Vessberg 1952' %}, pp. 148–149, gutus type, plates X:1–2, XX:4–5; {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 47, type XXIII:2; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 165, nos. 234–235; {% cite 'Antonaras 2009' %}, form 53a = {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, p. 102.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, pp. 204–205, no. 574.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

Pompeii and the Roman Villa: Art and Culture around the Bay of Naples (Los Angeles, 2009)

Gläser der Antike: Sammlung Erwin Oppenländer (Hamburg and Cologne, 1974–1975)