---
label: "157"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 470
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-157"
---

## Condition

Mended; part of the mouth is restored.

## Description

Folded in, flaring rim; cylindrical neck, constricted at its base; pear-shaped body; flat bottom. The vessel was made with florets and then free-blown. The florets used for its production are mainly of green glass with tiny yellow stems inside and a few of concentric circles with a wide red layer in a thinner white.

## Comments and Comparanda

Blown mosaic vessels represent a relatively unknown and apparently quite rare category of Roman glass. They were produced with a particular technique that involved blowing sections of composite mosaic canes that had been heated up and fused together. It was used to form vessels in shapes that were contemporaneously made with free-blowing too, like cups, small jars, and possibly jugs and/or modioli. These are much thinner vessels than the slumped/sagged and blown ones; the patterns are heavily distorted, unrecognizable in most cases, especially in the interior of the vessel.

Blown mosaic glass was probably produced from the late first century CE to the second half of the second century CE. Several examples have been unearthed in Augusta Raurica in Switzerland, which may have been the production site of this technique. Other examples have been found elsewhere in western Europe, including the UK, France, and Germany, but also on the Black Sea coast and in the Balkans ({% cite 'Stern 2017' %}, pp. 132–139; {% cite 'Stern and Fünfschilling 2020' %}, pp. 41–68).

The form of this vessel is a very widely distributed type of first-century CE ointment flask or unguentarium ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 22–23, form 6 variant; {% cite 'De Tommaso 1990' %}, p. 63, type 38; {% cite 'Fünfschilling 2015' %}, p. 402, form AR 127 = {% cite 'Rütti 1991a' %}, p. 114, plate 100, form AR 127/I) present in the central European and Mediterranean provinces of the Roman Empire.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 123, no. 329; p. 117, plate no. 329.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)