---
label: "202"
title: "Sprinkler"
layout: entry
order: 602
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-202"
---

## Condition

Complete; iridescent surface.

## Description

In-folded, tubular rim; flaring mouth; short, cylindrical neck, strongly constricted at its base; spherical body; flat base. At the center of the bottom is the straight mold seam. On the body are five mold-blown rows consisting of eight squares each. At the center of each square there is a boss. Irregularities on the pattern are visible.

## Comments and Comparanda

Vessels with a diaphragm formed at the bottom of the neck are known as sprinklers or dropper flasks due to the fact that the diaphragm allowed only individual drops of the fluid content to flow through it. In addition to flasks, jars and amphoriskoi were occasionally finished as sprinklers. They are often decorated with mold-blown and cut motifs, pinched fins, and applied trails, and they mostly appear in the Levant, Syria, eastern Palestine, and Mesopotamia, indicating a production site in the region, although a workshop seems to have been operating in Cologne too—one that specialized in snake-thread decoration. Sprinklers appeared in the third century CE and continued in the fourth and probably into the early fifth century CE ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 152–153; on other sprinklers, see {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, pp. 91–93, nos. 106–110, esp. pp. 109–110, no. 108, wherein further bibliography). Direct parallels include the following: {% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 78, no. 281; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 246, no. 132; {% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, p. 78, no. 281, plate 7, Royal Ontario Museum, 950.157.185 <https://collections.rom.on.ca/objects/522258>. See also the comparanda for {% cat '2003.337' %}.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 175, no. 483.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

Reflecting Antiquity: Modern Glass Inspired by Ancient Rome (Malibu, 2007–2008; Corning, 2008)
