---
label: "277"
title: "Mouse-Shaped Flask"
layout: entry
order: 789
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-277"
---

## Condition

Complete. Heavy weathering has given the vessel a mottled gray, brown, and white coloring with an iridescent sheen. Visible breaks in many places.

## Description

Flask in the form of a mouse. The body is teardrop-shaped, with a narrow, curved neck terminating in a spout forming the tail. The head has been formed by pinching to create long ears, small eyes, and a mouth. The feet are applied folded lumps. There is a thread wrapped 1.5 times around the tail, which is the mouth of the vessel. There is a solid pontil mark (W. 0.9 cm) on the forehead, which is the bottom of the vessel.

## Comments and Comparanda

There are two more glass flasks that render this particular plump-bodied quadruped ({% cite 'Christie’s 1985' %}, p. 44, lots 69, 70), one of which reportedly comes from Syria ({% cite 'Christie’s 1985' %}, p. 44, lot 69; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 201, no. 756). In addition, there are three similar flasks, one from Egypt ({% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 201, no. 757), one from the eastern Mediterranean ({% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, p. 450, no. 1267), and a third, unprovenanced example with snake-thread decoration, originally from the Kofler-Truniger Collection and now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art ({% cite 'Zanker et al. 2020' %}, p. 213, no. 99, acc. no. 2012.479.2). Also, two similar vessels were found in Aquileia ({% cite 'Mandruzzato and Marcante 2007' %}, p. 102, nos. 281–282).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2004, Ingrid Reisser (Böblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2004

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 238, no. 698.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)