---
label: "289"
title: "Jug"
layout: entry
order: 812
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-289"
---

## Condition

Intact. White soil inside.

## Description

Flaring, fire-polished rim; wide neck widening toward the conical body; conical, pushed-in base; concave bottom. Strap handle applied on the rim, forming triangular projections, pulled out and down to the shoulder; a small thread was pulled back up toward the rim, forming a central rib. On the body, S-shaped whitish striations are visible, probably signs of the rotation of the vase during the blowing process. On the bottom an annular pontil mark (W. 3 cm). The entire vessel is a bit off-center, leaning forward.

## Comments and Comparanda

Jugs with wide necks are known from the first century CE, although they differ in the shape of the handle ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 71–72, form 54). Among glass vessels, this vessel is quite unique in its shape. A similar, dark blue jug has been published from Pompeii ({% cite 'Scatozza Höricht 2012' %}, p. 93, no. 6837, plate II, fig. 6). The shape derives from metal prototypes known among finds from Pompeii ({% cite 'Painter 2001' %}, p. 65, plate 18, fig. 2, jug M20, wherein relevant metal parallels). Vessels made of the same glass in the Getty collection are the alabastron {% cat '2004.22' %} and the patella {% cat '2003.234' %}, also dated to the early first century CE.

## Provenance

Mr. and Mrs. Andrew Constable Maxwell; by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Sotheby Parke Bernet 1979' %}, lot 110.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

Pompeii and the Roman Villa: Art and Culture around the Bay of Naples (Los Angeles, 2009)