---
label: "334"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 879
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-334"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. A small, repaired break on the lip, and very few nicks and scratches. Large areas covered with weathering.

## Description

In-folded, slightly everted rim; cylindrical neck with a horizontal constriction at the transition to the ovular body, which is standing on a folded, tubular ring-base; the bottom is slightly concave. An anomaly or a semi-annular fold on the undersurface could be interpreted as a pontil scar, yet the constriction at the bottom of the neck indicates that the rim was shaped while it was held with pincers/jacks from the neck.

## Comparanda

Small-size flasks with ovular body are one of the most widely appearing forms during the first century CE ({% cite 'Vessberg 1952' %}, plate VII:27; {% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, form 28a [variant]; {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 44, type XVI:4; {% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 38–41, no. 8; {% cite 'De Tommaso 1990' %}, p. 81, type 67; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 211, no. 314). Opaque red (or white, like {% cat '2003.243' %}) unguentaria are known in the first century CE. The base-ring of this vessel is set apart, bringing it closer to the form of elongated flask known from Aquileia, Italy ({% cite 'De Tommaso 1990' %}, p. 81, type 66; {% cite 'Mandruzzato and Marcante 2007' %}, p. 100, no. 269) and eastern Mediterranean sites, dated to the second–third centuries CE ({% cite 'Vessberg 1956' %}, p. 151, plate 47:28; {% cite 'Clairmont 1963' %}, p. 140, no. 743, plate XVI).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 112, no. 304.

## Exhibitions

None