---
label: "374"
title: "Inkwell"
layout: entry
order: 974
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-374"
---

## Condition

Intact. Incrustation on the inside.

## Description

Small, circular opening at the center of a wide, horizontal, concave rim. A fold of the glass forms a ridge at the transition to the conical body, which tapers to the base; the bottom is slightly concave. A thick coil handle starts on the lower part of the body, forms a small ring, and ends on the ridge. A very fine annular pontil scar (W. 1.8, Th. 0.1 cm) is visible in the center of the bottom.

## Comments and Comparanda

On inkwells in general, see comments on {% cat '2003.239' %}. The closest parallel to this vessel is an unpublished find from the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (17.194.119): http://www.metmuseum.org/collection/the-collection-online/search/249364. For a one-handled example with similar body shape from Syria, ascribed to a Syro-Palestinian production and dated to the second century CE, see {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, pp. 187, 249, no. 752, with further bibliography. Two other examples are known from Corinth, dated to the first and early second centuries, respectively: {% cite 'Davidson 1952' %}, p. 101, no. 636, fig. 8; {% cite 'Antonaras 2022a' %}, pp. 68–69, 119, no. 443.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 203, no. 571.

{% cite 'Lightfoot 2013a' %}, pp. 425–426.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)