---
label: "118"
title: "Striped Mosaic Bowl"
layout: entry
order: 402
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-118"
---

## Condition

Mended and filled; some weathering on the exterior.

## Description

Bowl with vertical rim and convex, curving body tapering gradually toward the mildly convex bottom. Thick and tall conical, applied base-ring made of a length of translucent yellow glass.

The striped mosaic pattern of the vessel is formed from 16 lengths, varying in size, of two types of composite canes laid in parallel rows across the body and extending from the bottom to the rim. The canes are alternately: (1) white flanked by red and purple layers of glass and (2) white flanked by yellow layers. The rim is a twisted cane of a transparent yellowish ground and a fine opaque white thread wound spirally. The base is a translucent yellow cane.

## Comments and Comparanda

Different forms of Hellenistic mosaic bowls are known, and three different kinds of mosaic (network, striped, or ribbon and composite mosaic) were used for their production ({% cite 'Weinberg 1965' %}; {% cite 'Oliver 1968' %}; {% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, pp. 189–197; and more recently {% cite 'Lightfoot 2019' %}). The production center of mosaic and network mosaic vessels remains unknown, although a proposed location is Alexandria, Egypt ({% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2000' %}, p. 18, 140).

This particular bowl belongs to a group of late Hellenistic glass mosaic vessels, examples of which have been recovered from a shipwreck that sank about 80 BCE off the island of Antikythera in the Aegean, carrying a diverse cargo traveling from the eastern Mediterranean to Italy ({% cite 'Kaltsas, Vlachogianni, and Bouyia 2012' %}, with all previous bibliography).

There are at least three direct comparanda of ribbon bowls (with base-ring and upright rim): the first was recovered from the Antikythera shipwreck ({% cite 'Weinberg 1965' %}, pp. 34, 37, no. 7, figs. 15–16; {% cite 'Weinberg and McClellan 1992' %}, p. 108, no. 69; {% cite 'Avronidaki 2012' %}, p. 140, no. 104), and the other three are unprovenanced (Metropolitan Museum of Art 1929.100.86: {% cite 'Oliver 1968' %}, pp. 55–56, fig. 8; {% cite 'Lightfoot 2019' %}, p. 173, fig. 6; Yale Art Gallery 1955.6.28: {% cite 'Matheson 1980' %}, pp. 12–13, no. 38; {% cite 'Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994' %}, pp. 298–299, no. 86). This same bowl shape is also formed with network and millefiori glass ({% cite 'Oliver 1968' %}, pp. 55–56).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his daughter, Ingrid Reisser, 1988; 1988–2004, Ingrid Reisser (Böblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2004

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 115, no. 310.

{% cite '*JPGM Handbook* 7th ed.' %}, p. 79, ill.

{% cite '*JPGM Handbook Antiquities* rev. ed.' %}, p. 103.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

Gläser der Antike: Sammlung Erwin Oppenländer (Hamburg and Cologne, 1974–1975)