---
label: "344"
title: "Sprinkler Flask"
layout: entry
order: 892
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-344"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved but mended.

## Description

Fire-polished, horizontal rim with a cutout fold beneath it, giving the impression of an applied coil. Short and wide neck ending in a diaphragm; pear-shaped body, standing on a mildly concave bottom. An annular pontil mark (W. 2, Th. 0.1 cm) is visible on its bottom. Around the body four deep, vertical indentations.

## Comments and Comparanda

Sprinklers, or dropper flasks, emerge before the middle of the third century CE and stand out among the extremely diverse fourth-century CE Syrian glass production. They are usually flasks of different shapes: amphoriskoi, tubes, animal- and head-shaped flasks, but also jars. They have in common the diaphragm at the base of their neck that allowed the content—apparently some costly liquid, oil or perfume—to exit one drop at the time. It has been proposed that the reference in Jewish sources to a “flask whose brim is squashed inside it” refers to sprinklers (Tosefta Miqva’ot 6[7]:22 cited in {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 222). They were often decorated with expanded geometric motifs blown in full-size molds. Sprinklers were made in Syria, eastern Palestine, and Mesopotamia, although they appear occasionally in other regions too ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 95–100; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 133–134, 152–153; {% cite 'Dussart 1998' %}, pp. 161–162, types BXII.211, 212, 2131, 2132, 22). The earliest examples from Dura-Europos predate the destruction of the city in 256 CE ({% cite 'Clairmont 1963' %}, pp. 104–106, nos. 486–503, plate XII). The finds from the cemetery at Tell Mahuz in Mesopotamia are dated to the third–fourth centuries ({% cite 'Negro Ponzi 1984' %}, pp. 33–40). For sprinkler flasks of the same form, with snake-thread decoration, see {% cat '2003.437' %} and {% cat '2003.438' %}, and with pinched fins, see {% cat '2004.42' %}.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 216, no. 629.

## Exhibitions
