---
label: "533"
title: "Bead"
layout: entry
order: 2155
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-533"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved with weathering and some small areas of iridescence. Mended.

## Description

Flattened, irregular cylindrical gold-glass bead. Thread hole along its longer dimension.

An impressed standing nude young male figure is depicted on the front of the bead. He is the god Harpocrates, the son of Isis and Osiris (*LIMC* IV.1 s.v. “Harpocrates,” pp. 415–445, esp. pp. 419–423 for representations with cornucopia). He rests his weight on his right leg, and his left leg is slightly bent so that the pelvis and torso are positioned in contrapposto. The figure has protruding belly. The head is presented en face. The figure bends his right hand up across his chest in the typical gesture of silence, with the index finger to his lips. With his left hand he holds a large cornucopia next to his body.

The back side of the bead is undecorated and smooth.

## Comments and Comparanda

Gold-glass beads appear from the Hellenistic period onward. They are made of two layers of glass with metal foil between them as their principal decoration. They were used as a substitute for metal beads and they were popular in Egypt, where they were probably produced, and in Nubia. Rhodes, Macedonia, and the Black Sea coast have also been identified as manufacturing centers of gold-glass beads ({% cite 'Alekseeva 1978' %}, pp. 27–32; {% cite 'Weinberg 1971' %}, pp. 147–148, figs. 1–2, plate 82a; {% cite 'Spaer 1993' %}, pp. 9–25; {% cite 'Spaer 2001' %}, pp. 130–135). Usually they are plain; occasionally they are decorated with ribbing or granular patterns and very rarely with impressed motifs like the god Harpocrates and a female deity ({% cite 'Spaer 2001' %}, p. 137, nos. 234–235; {% cite 'Spaer 1993' %}, p. 16, fig. 11). An almost identical bead is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (10.130.2477: <https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/558843>) and another in the British Museum (1879,0522.33: [https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/object/G_1879-0522-33](https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/object/G_1879-0522-33)). Harpocrates was also represented on glass pendants, dating to the late second–first centuries BCE ({% cite 'Froehner 1903' %}, no. 843, p. 122, plate 151.3, 151.5, now part of the Metropolitan Museum of Art collection; also one in the Louvre: {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2011' %}, p. 39, no. 28).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 83, no. 232.

## Exhibitions

None