---
label: "583"
title: "Statuette of a Bull"
layout: entry
order: 2331
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-583"
---

## Condition

Pastiche. Seams are concealed by weathering that has caused some discoloration, especially around the body of the animal.

## Description

Pastiche. Statuette of a quadruped animal, probably a bull. A large part of the conical body is made of dark green glass around which is wound in spirals a wide off-white band that was then dragged, forming a feathered motif. The applied legs are made of dark blue glass with red striations. Only a tiny part of the original animal’s head is preserved, hidden almost entirely in the new head; original head was smaller and was bent toward the ground, which might indicate that it had horns, presented in a charging pose. The neck was also smaller than the current one. The head, legs, and tail are applied. The head is made of a greenish, bubbly resin, and the ears, eyes, nostrils, and mouth are rendered with red resin, imitating glass. Red and black resin is used for the rear part of the body, lower part of the legs, tail, and the drum that connects the animal to its circular base. In all four legs the lump attached to the body belongs to the original object, made of very dark blue glass with opaque red striations, and the lower part of the legs is modern filling. The base comprises a discoid core of dark green glass, different from the body; it is possible that it is the rim of a flask and that the glass in the bottom was added from another vessel.

## Comments and Comparanda

The shape and the decoration of the original part of the body are very similar to bird-like Islamic flasks: {% cite 'Jenkins 1986' %}, p. 11, no. 2 and {% cite 'Carboni 2001' %}, pp. 302–303, no. 79, with bibliography; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, p. 218, no. 992. Further published examples of bird-like Islamic flasks include the following: Billups collection B271A: {% cite 'Corning 1962' %}, p. 22, no. 28; {% cite 'Lamm 1930' %}, vol. 1, p. 103, no. 9, and v. 2, plate 32.9; {% cite 'Clairmont 1977' %}, p. 137, nos. 502 and 503; {% cite 'Riis 1957' %}, p. 62, fig. 181, and pp. 67–68, fig. 203, excavated at Hama, Syria; {% cite 'Wightman 1989' %}, plate 72:5, excavated in Jerusalem; {% cite 'Scanlon and Pinder-Wilson 2001' %}, p. 108, type 44e, excavated at Fustat.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 253, no. 742.

## Exhibitions

None