---
label: "312"
title: "Jar"
layout: entry
order: 846
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-312"
---

## Condition

White incrustation in the interior; very few signs of weathering on the exterior.

## Description

Fire-polished, horizontal rim; short and very wide neck; squat globular body; conical, applied, and tooled base. The base is partly irregular, and slanting tooling marks are visible on it. A fine blue thread is wound four times around the neck, starting from the upper shoulder. Thirteen dark blue coil handles are placed around the rim, each starting on the shoulder and ending with a bend on the edge of the rim. Part of a pontil mark is visible on the bottom, off-center.

## Comments and Comparanda

In Levantine glass production, the use of bent trails forming zigzags covering the area between the shoulders and the neck of jars is common in the fourth and fifth centuries ({% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 34, types VI:9, 10; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, pp. 205–206, nos. 302–304). In the same spirit, contemporaneous jars are adorned with many handles around the neck; these are made of individual lengths of glass, often in a different color from the body. Parallels include the following: {% cite 'Abdul Hak 1965' %}, p. 31, fig. 14; {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 34, type VI:20; {% cite 'Matheson 1980' %}, no. 315; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, no. 126; {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, p. 425, no. 1185, plate 107, example without base; {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, p. 425, no. 1187, plate 107, example with three pinched toes; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 205, no. 301.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 212, no. 609.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)