---
label: "236"
title: "Bowl, zarte Rippenschale"
layout: entry
order: 715
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-236"
---

## Condition

Condition is good, and vessel is intact. Some small areas of iridescence and some minor nicks and scratches. No impurities and very few pinprick bubbles.

## Description

Rough, uneven, cracked-off, slightly flaring rim; hemispherical body; slightly concave bottom. Around the body, 1.7 cm below the rim, are 16 unevenly spaced, vertical pinched ribs. A white thread is wound around the vessel from the center of the bottom to just below the rim: nine rotations in the area below the rim, 10 rotations on the ribs (almost invisible between the ribs), and at least two more on the lowest part of the body to the center of the bottom.

## Comments and Comparanda

One of the earliest free-blown forms of tableware are the ribbed bowls, known by the German term “zarte Rippenschalen.” They appear at the beginning of the first century CE and cease to be produced shortly after the middle of the century. They were made in yellowish glass ({% cat '2003.227' %}), but also in intense colors, including translucent brown, blue (this vessel), and purple ({% cat '2004.20' %}). Milky white threads were often used to decorate the intensely colored vases, and opaque white examples were decorated with translucent blue threads. These threads were spirally wound from the center of the bottom to the transition to the rim of the vessel, and then the ribs were pinched around the body. A considerable number of published examples are monochrome and do not have any additional applied decoration. On the form and many direct parallels from controlled excavation sites see {% cite 'Haevernick [1958] 1981' %}, pp. XI–XXVIII; {% cite 'Haevernick [1967] 1981' %}; {% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 35–36, form 17; {% cite 'Lith 1977' %}, pp. 29–38; {% cite 'Biaggio-Simona 1991' %}, pp. 71–74; {% cite 'Rütti 1991a' %}; {% cite 'Fünfschilling 2015' %}, AR 28; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 82–83, no. 24; {% cite 'Weinberg and Stern 2009' %}, pp. 45–46; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 57–58, form 8.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 100, no. 262; p. 103, plate no. 262.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)