---
label: "360"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 938
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-360"
---

## Condition

Almost fully preserved; part of the rim is replaced. Milky white cloudy weathering on large areas of the interior.

## Description

Fire-polished, flaring rim; short neck; biconical, pointed body, which is tooled to form a thick, discoid base stand. Two trails of glass are attached under the rim, looped six times against the body, and end on the upper body area.

The base is flat on the lower side and convex on the upper, indicating that it was probably made by pressing the entire vessel on a flat surface—i.e., the marver—while the blowpipe was still attached to the rim, an assumption corroborated by the fact that on the bottom there is no pontil mark visible.

## Comments and Comparanda

The vessel is made of decolorized glass, which was much more valuable and expensive than ordinary greenish glass. In Roman times glass decolorized with manganese or antimony appears from the last third of the first century CE until the beginning of the fourth century CE, with the greatest distribution from the second quarter of the second to the mid-third century. It was used mainly in western Europe and mostly for tableware, although bottles and unguentaria appear in decolorized glass as well ({% cite 'Foy et al. 2019' %}, vol. 1, pp. xiii–xvii; {% cite 'Stern 2020' %}, pp. 769–774). This particular flask form appears in the western provinces ({% cite 'Foy et al. 2019' %}, vol. 2. p. 188, form IN 185; {% cite 'Foy and Nenna 2001' %}, p. 155, no. 201; {% cite 'Beretta and Di Pasquale 2004' %}, p. 205, no. 1.16); plain examples without handles appear also in the first century CE ({% cite 'Scatozza Höricht 2012' %}, p. 140, no. 11294A, plate XXVIII; {% cite 'Larese 2004' %}, no. 393, plate XI; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 214, nos. 323–324).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 207, no. 585.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

Gläser der Antike: Sammlung Erwin Oppenländer (Hamburg and Cologne, 1974–1975)