---
label: "551"
title: "Ram Head Pendant"
layout: entry
order: 2203
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
#menu: false 
object:
  - id: "cat-551"
---

## Condition

Surface has layer of weathering in different areas.

## Description

Opaque white ram head; curved amber-colored horns. Eyes are made of a dark green glass, appearing black, topped by a slightly smaller white disk; the pupil is a dark green lump of glass. The nostrils and the mouth are indicated with a dark green (appearing black) glass. Ears are made of spherical white beads. There is an amber-colored suspension loop between the horns.

Remains of dark red, sandy coating adhere to the interior of a tiny rod hole.

Used as the central pendant of a necklace of gold beads, this piece is attached to a golden cylindrical bead with a stem and hemispherical element, from which the suspension loop hangs.

## Comments and Comparanda

On Punic glass pendants in general, see comments on {% cat '2003.206' %}. This belongs to a subgroup of Punic glass pendants representing small ram heads. This particular subgroup includes multicolored examples (H. 2–3 cm) with elongated snout, which are dated between 350 and 200 BCE ({% cite 'Seefried 1982' %}, type EIb, pp. 8, 136–138, plate III).

## Provenance

By 1980 , Private Collection; by 1982–1983, Robin Symes, Limited, founded 1977, dissolved 2005 (London, England), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1983

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Taimsalu 1980' %}.

{% cite 'Mattusch 1994' %}.

{% cite 'JPGM Acquisitions 1983' %}, p. 255, no. 138.1; fig. 138a.

## Exhibitions

None