---
label: "404"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 1077
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-404"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. Cracked and mended. Bluish-gray surface in areas with calcination; black and off-white weathering. Interior covered with a black layer of weathering.

## Description

Flat, fire-polished rim, smooth at the periphery, rough toward the opening, probably as a result of weathering; globular neck and sphero-conical body; small, flat bottom, possibly the area where the pontil was attached.

## Comments and Comparanda

This vessel belongs to a group of thick-walled glass flasks that have been identified with ceramic “grenades” of the same shape and size, sometimes with molded decoration, which are well known in the Islamic word ({% cite 'Ettinghausen 1965' %}, pp. 218–229). It has been assumed that they were either actual grenades, or that they were used for the transportation of valuable liquids, or, more plausibly, that they were beer containers (*fuqqāʿa* in Arabic) ({% cite 'Ghouchani and Adle 1992' %}, pp. 72–92; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, pp. 92–93, no. 767). For other glass parallels, see {% cite 'Mostafa 1959' %}, pp. 89–92; {% cite 'Ettinghausen 1965' %}, pp. 218–229; {% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 255, no. 746; {% cite 'Maddison and Savage-Smith 1997' %}, nos. 210, 211; {% cite 'Carboni 2001' %}, pp. 212–213, no. 53b; {% cite 'Valiulina 2005' %}, p. 48, fig. 21:3; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, pp. 92–93, no. 767.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 255, no. 745.

## Exhibitions

None