---
label: "256"
title: "Beaker"
layout: entry
order: 742
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-256"
---

## Condition

Intact.

## Description

Flaring rim; elongated ovoid body; conical base. The entire vessel bears wheel-cut decoration. There are two parallel incisions below the lip, followed by a wide smooth band on the transition to the body that is delineated by a relief rib. The main body area is covered with three rows of lozenge-shaped facets, forming a very regular and tight faceted pattern. The top and bottom rows have rounded upper ends. Below this band there is a wide, smooth band, that has eliminated the ending of the bottom row of facets; this band is delineated at the bottom by a high and angular rib. The edge of the base is also carefully cut, at an angle. At the center of the bottom there is a raised ring (W. 0.55 cm).

## Comments and Comparanda

The vessel is made of decolorized glass, which was much more valuable and expensive than ordinary greenish glass. In Roman times, glass decolorized with manganese or antimony appears from the last third of the first century CE until the beginning of the fourth century CE, but it was most in fashion and had its highest distribution levels from the second quarter of the second to the mid-third century. It was used mainly in western Europe and mostly for tableware, although bottles and unguentaria appear in colorless glass as well ([[Foy et al. 2018]], vol. 1, pp. xiii–xvii; [[Stern 2020]], pp. 769–774).

This beaker belongs to a group of possibly molded, probably blown and polished vessels, comprising conical and ovoid beakers, bowls, jars, and spoons, that are all made of thick decolorized glass ([[Foy et al. 2018]], vol. 1, pp. 13–14). The technique of facet-cutting on glass was invented in Italy in the late 60s or early 70s, when transparent colorless glass became fashionable; facets are clearly visible on transparent glass and thus the result was much appreciated. In particular, ovoid beakers—sometimes elongated like 96.AF.320 and sometimes almost spherical—decorated at the center of the body with oval, circular, or lozenge facets flanked by flat or protruding zones are dated to the late first through early second century CE, and all published examples are found in the western and northern provinces of the Roman Empire ([[Foy et al. 2018]], vol. 1, pp. 26–27, form IN 18).

## Provenance

1986, Private Collection \[sold, Ancient and Islamic Glass, Ancient Jewellery and Silver, Middle Eastern, Egyptian, Greek, Etruscan, and Roman Antiquities, Sotheby’s, London, July 14, 1986, lot 60, to Hans Benzian\]; 1986–1994, Hans Benzian (Lucerne, Switzerland) \[sold, The Benzian Collection of Ancient and Islamic Glass, Sotheby’s, London, July 7, 1994, lot 138\]; 1996, Phoenix Ancient Art S.A. (Geneva, Switzerland), by exchange with the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1996

## Bibliography

[[Sotheby’s 1986]], lot no. 60.

[[Benzian 1994]], lot no. 138.

[[Report 97–98]], p. 68.

## Exhibitions

None