---
label: "257"
title: "Beaker"
layout: entry
order: 743
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-257"
---

## Condition

This beaker is severely weathered. Its surface bears extensive iridescence, dark accretions, and flaking.

## Description

Cut-off, probably mildly polished rim; conical body, standing on a low, slightly protruding bottom.

The vessel is decorated with wheel-cutting. Two parallel, horizontal grooves form a rib between them at mid-body height. Another set of grooves form a rib at the lower end of the body. The base is conical, wheel-cut as well. The bottom is wheel-cut at its perimeter, leaving a central raised disk (Diam. 2.5 cm). In addition, some anomalies at the center of the bottom might be interpreted as a pontil scar (1 × 0.9 cm).

## Comments and Comparanda

The vessel is made of decolorized glass, which was much more valuable and expensive than ordinary greenish glass. In Roman times glass decolorized with manganese or antimony appears from the last third of the first century CE until the beginning of the fourth century CE, but it was most in fashion and had its highest distribution levels from the second quarter of the second to the mid-third century. It was used mainly in western Europe and mostly for tableware, although bottles and unguentaria appear among in colorless glass as well ({% cite 'Foy et al. 2019' %}, vol. 1, pp. xiii–xvii; {% cite 'Stern 2020' %}, pp. 769–774).

This beaker belongs to a group of probably blown, or possibly molded, and polished vessels—comprising conical and ovoid beakers, bowls, jars, and spoons—that are all made of thick decolorized glass ({% cite 'Foy et al. 2019' %}, vol. 1, pp. 13–14). The technique of facet-cutting on glass was invented in Italy in the late 60s or early 70s, when transparent, almost colorless glass became fashionable, and that was due to the fact that facets are best visible on transparent glass and thus the result was much appreciated.

Truncated conical beakers in particular, decorated at different parts exclusively with horizontal ribs, are dated to the end of the first–first half of the second century CE and find spots of published examples include all parts of the Roman Empire ({% cite 'Foy et al. 2019' %}, vol. 1, pp. 22, form IN 13; {% cite 'Fünfschilling 2015' %}, pp. 312–313, form AR 44).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 184, no. 508.

## Exhibitions

None
