---
label: "380"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 1022
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-380"
---

## Condition

Mended. Probably a pastiche: The neck seems to belong to another vessel and has been glued on the body of another. Iridescence on the exterior; in the grooves and in the interior, incrustation.

## Description

Cut-off rim; conical neck, tapering toward the body, covered with 12 vertical grooves. Horizontal shoulder; rectangular body, square in cross section; flat bottom. On the bottom a f the top side and two short oblique strokes flanking the central strokes in the middle of each side.

## Comments and Comparanda

Wheel-cutting and wheel-engraving were popular decorative techniques in Islamic glassware between the ninth and eleventh centuries, as numerous finds from various sites in Syria, Palestine, Iraq, Iran, Egypt, and Tunis prove. Six categories of cut and engraved objects are defined on the basis of the decoration: scratch-engraved, faceted, with disks and related motifs, with raised outlines, slant-cut, and linear. In the twelfth century cutting gradually goes out of fashion, replaced by enameling, the technique that prevailed during the next two centuries in Islamic glassware.

Cutting was employed mostly for the embellishment of colorless vessels of various forms, for example, bowls, bottles, goblets, and flasks, although colorful and even cameo vessels occur too. There are indications that quite similar products were made in Iran, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, and Egypt ({% cite 'Kröger 1995' %}, pp. 116–175; {% cite 'Kröger 1999' %}, pp. 219–232; {% cite 'Carboni 2001' %}, pp. 71–136; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001b' %}, pp. 155–161; {% cite 'Foy 2020' %}, pp. 85–98). For flasks with square or polygonal body see comments and comparanda for {% cat '79.AF.184.28' %}. In addition, for flasks with cut decoration that are square in cross section, see comments and comparanda for {% cat '79.AF.184.42' %}. Also, for similar prismatic flasks, cf. {% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, pp. 73–74, nos. 727 and 728. For a vessel with polygonal neck and globular body covered with cut, multifaceted decoration see {% cite 'Musée Curtius 1958' %}, pp. 52–53, no. 66 (B.A.A.R. 1460). For miniature flasks with cut decoration see {% cat '2003.472' %}, with several parallels from various sites.

## Provenance

1979, Edwin A. Lipps, 1922–1988 (Pacific Palisades, California), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1979

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None