---
label: "578"
title: "Window Pane"
layout: entry
order: 2281
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-578"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. Most of the surface is covered in a layer of iridescence of a pinkish hue.

## Description

A shallow, convex disc made of greenish glass with many large bubbles.

Fire-polished rim. The piece is slightly lopsided and cannot stand on its own. It was probably a windowpane. A difference in the weathering on both sides at the circumference forms a band (W. ca. 1.1 cm), probably indicating the area that was covered by plaster or was inset in a wood or stone frame. The sturdiness/thickness also supports the interpretation of the piece as a windowpane. A circular scar of a solid pontil (1.5 × 1.3 cm) can be seen on the convex underside.

## Comparanda and Comments

Circular windowpanes of various diameters were already in use in the sixth century CE ({% cite 'Foy 2005a' %}, p. 112; {% cite 'Nenna 2005' %}, pp. 125–126) and continued to be used in the Islamic world ({% cite 'Foy 2005b' %}; {% cite 'Foy 2005c' %}; {% cite 'Hadad 2005' %}, pp. 30, 49, 63) as well as in the Byzantine Empire ({% cite 'Ousterhout 1999' %}, pp. 151–154; {% cite 'Antonaras and Ricci 2022' %}, pp. 352–353), practically unaltered. The plain rim of this disc, though, may be an indication of an earlier date, before the thirteenth–fourteenth century, when a folded rim becomes the rule for windowpanes.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 200, no. 556.

## Exhibitions

None