---
label: "553"
title: "Double-Faced Pendant"
layout: entry
order: 2181
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-553"
---

## Condition

Upper part chipped off below and along sides. Rough surface; weathered and iridescent.

## Description

Ellipsoidal double-head pendant.

Side A: The face of a young female figure with the following characteristics: oval face framed by a rich hairstyle, falling in curls to the neck, a beaded band over her forehead, arched eyebrows, large eyes, wide nose, and small mouth. At the center of the lower, straight side of the bust a vertical pole is visible, indicating that a standing structure supported the bust of the figure.

Side B: Oval face, wider than face on side A, framed by a rich hairstyle, falling in curls to the neck; eyebrows are not discernible and the eyes are normal size; full cheeks; wide nose; and small mouth. Remains of an ornate band over the forehead visible. At the center of the lower, straight side of the bust a vertical pole is visible, indicating that a standing structure supported the bust of the figure. A small part of an added band of glass is visible on the top of the head on this side, probably remains of a loop.

On the bottom of the pendant is a cylindrical opening (W. 0.4, D. 1.2 cm).

## Comparanda

Double-faced pendants with female bust are a well-known and studied group of glass artifacts (Haevernick [1968] 1981, pp. 192–197; [[Spaer 2001]], pp. 160–161, 167, nos. 321–322). They were the head of long metal hairpins. The pendant was formed by picking up and rolling a small mass of glass around the end of a metal rod; it then was pressed in a two-part mold. Quite usually a lot of excess glass escaped along the seams, as in our example (see also [[Spaer 2001]], p. 161). The opening formed when the rod was removed is where the shaft of the hairpin was secured. The female figure with long curly hair represented on these pendants has been identified with the chief Punic goddess ,Tanit ([[Haevernick [1968] 1981]], pp. 188–197; [[Adam-Veleni and Ignatiadou 2010]], p. 405, no. 495; [[Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2011]], pp. 302–304, nos. 481–486, esp. 484). Most of these pendants are found in the Punic, western Mediterranean region. It is suspected that they were produced in a Punic center, possibly even Carthage itself, and they are connected to the rod-formed head pendants {% cat '2003.205' %}, {% cat '2003.206' %}, {% cat '2003.207' %}, {% cat '2003.208' %}, [2004.009](#num), [2004.010](#num).

On the pendants with male faces and their iconography see comments on {% cat '78.AF.324.3' %}.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2004, Ingrid Reisser (Böblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2004

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 83, no. 231.

## Exhibitions

None