---
label: "556"
title: "Pendant"
layout: entry
order: 2184
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-556"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. Tiny chips on the side.

## Description

Circular medallion with oval suspension ring on the top. The suspension ring is drawn out of a lump of glass folded backward over a rod and reattached when the device was stamped onto the medallion. Circular die. Crisp relief. Back side is smooth and flat.

Stamped, frontal bust of a beardless figure, flanked by an inscription that identifies her as Victory, ΝΙΚΗ, written in capital Greek letters. Vertically arranged, on the left side, facing upward, ΝΙ, and on the right, facing downward, ΚΗ. The hair of the figure is quite voluminous and reaches the middle of the neck, where it ends in a wide foldover. A wide, triangular, beaded band is visible over the forehead. Large eyes, straight thick nose, mouth closed. Long, triangular neck rising from the oval, almost angular opening of the dress-chiton. The front edge of the dress has relief decoration.

## Comments and Comparanda

Pendants of this type are quite numerous, particularly in the Syro-Palestinian region. Mainly are made of yellowish glass, and less often of dark blue and olive-green.

They have been grouped by Dan Barag [[Barag 2001]], [[Barag 2002]], pp. 307–308} in three types according to the shape of the suspension loop: (a) flattened in front, vertical, (dated between the mid-fourth century and the early fifth century), (B) heavy and rounded, convex loops, not always vertical (dated to the late fourth to mid-fifth centuries), and (C) large annular loops on irregularly shaped disks (dated between the second half of the fifth into the early sixth century). On the basis of the iconography of their ornament six types have been discerned: (1) classical Greek themes, (2) biblical themes, (3) Jewish symbols, (4) Christian symbols, (5) animals, and (6) miscellaneous motifs. The three pendants in the JPGM collection belong to the first type in terms of the shape of the loop, the size, and the quality and the theme of the stamped decoration. For other comparanda see two medallions from Hauran in yellowish glass ([[Zouhdi 1977]], p. 56, no. d, fig. 4:2). Several finds from unknown findspots have been published: [[Stern 2001]], p. 380, no. 213; [[Barag 2001]], p. 179, no. 356; [[Barag 2002]], p. 314, LA-17.

## Provenance

1978, Ira Goldberg (Beverly Hills, California), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1978

## Bibliography

[[Lees-Causey 1983]], pp. 154–155.

## Exhibitions

None