---
label: "315"
title: "Jar"
layout: entry
order: 849
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-315"
nextPage: /catalogue/a_vessels/i_ancient/3_blown/2_free_blown/11_unguentaria/1_unguentaria_handleless/
---

## Condition

Intact; partly covered with iridescent weathering.

## Description

Fire-polished, almost vertical rim; funnel mouth with a tubular flange; and a mild constriction at the bottom. Globular body; flat, slightly concave bottom. No pontil mark visible on the bottom. Thirteen pinched, vertical ribs are visible from lower body to rim, and were made before the inflation of the body to its final size.

## Comments and Comparanda

This form of jar, with the characteristic flange at mid-height of the neck, is widely distributed in the Syro-Palestinian region, known in examples with globular and ovular body, occasionally decorated with applied threads, indentations, or dip mold–blown or pinched ribs. The flange indicates that these jars were not used for drinking or pouring liquids ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 150–151). For plain examples see {% cat '2003.411' %}; for ribbed examples see {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 33, type VI:6-1; {% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, p. 95, no. 327, plate 22; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 229, no. 116; {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 238, no. 306.

## Provenance

1940, Harry Leonard Simmons [sold, Parke-Bernet Galleries, Inc., New York, April 5, 1940, lot 123, through French and Co. to J. Paul Getty]; 1940–1976, J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, upon his death, held in trust by the estate; 1976–1978, Estate of J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, distributed to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1978

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Parke-Bernet Galleries 1940' %}, lot 123, ill.

{% cite 'Stothart 1965' %}, p. 20, no. F-14.

## Exhibitions

None