---
label: "207"
title: "Amphoriskos"
layout: entry
order: 614
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-207"
---

## Condition

Mended; some areas are filled.

## Description

Flaring, in-folded, and flattened tubular rim,; cylindrical neck, mildly constricted at its base; convex, sloping shoulder; cylindrical body, with convex lower part; flat bottom. Two opposed, bifurcated strap handles of translucent dark blue glass applied on the shoulders, drawn upward, bent, and attached halfway up neck.

The mold-blown decoration consists of a frieze of 16 down-turned tongues in raised outline with raised darts between them on the shoulder, and a frieze of 24 upturned identical tongues and darts on the lower part of the body. The central, cylindrical part of the body is bordered on the upper part by a raised ridge and a groove and on the lower part by a concave band. The central part of the body is decorated with a wreath made of grape and ivy twigs ending in olive tree twigs at the front. On each mold section a different plant is depicted, arranged horizontally, tip to tip, from left to right: (1) ivy branch(es) with four pairs of trefoil leaves pointing toward the center, bundled at the center of the panel with three oblique ring bands/filets; (2) grape branch(es) with four pairs of multifoil leaves pointing toward the center, bundled at the center of the panel with three oblique rings/filets; (3) two probably stylized olive branches with two pairs of single-pointed leaves alternating with round fruits, each branch ending toward the center to an oblique, oval thickening. On the bottom are three raised concentric rings surrounding a central boss, the outer ring forming a base-ring 3 cm in diameter.

## Comments and Comparanda

There are several published mold-blown flasks decorated with a central band that is filled with floral sprays flanked by tongues and petals, decoration which appears in a number of variants. It has been suggested that the concept of the design can be connected to Aristeas, a famous first-century CE glassblower ({% cite 'Harden 1944' %}, pp. 84–86; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 166). This vessel is a unique example with two handles from a well-known type of mold-blown vessel, all of which are finished as jugs. They comprise a quite widespread type ({% cite 'Harden 1944' %}, pp. 84–86, 292; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 116–168, nos. 75–77). Several finds originate from the Syro-Palestinian region, where they were quite probably produced {% cite 'Harden 1944' %}, p. 84–85, 292; {% cite 'Israeli 1964' %}, pp. 36–37, no. 4b, figs. 6–7) and Cyprus ({% cite 'Vessberg 1952' %}, p. 130, plate VI, no. 20; {% cite 'Karageorghis 1988' %}, p. 799, 801, fig. 16). They are known also from Austria {% cite 'Harden 1944' %}, p. 85, no. d; {% cite 'Czurda-Ruth 1979' %}, pp. 144–145, no. 1055, plates 9, 22) and Spain ([[Price 1973]], p. 68, no. 2), and few more with unrecorded findspots ({% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 66, no. 59; {% cite 'Oliver 1980' %}, p. 62, no.55; {% cite 'Bomford 1976' %}, no. 42). Since the find from Magdalensburg ({% cite 'Czurda-Ruth 1979' %}, pp. 144–145, no. 1055, plates 9, 22) is dated before 45 CE the whole series is dated before that point. This earlier date is also supported by the fact that opaque glass went out of fashion by the 60s.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 158, no. 440.

{% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 167 n. 8j.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)