---
label: "228"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 701
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-228"
---

## Condition

Covered with iridescence and milky white crust.

## Description

In-folded, flaring, tubular rim; conical mouth constricted at its base, almost forming a diaphragm; skewed oblong, almost cylindrical body, wider toward the bottom, ending in a solid tubular toe with a globular finial. A pair of coil handles have been applied on the shoulders and drawn up to the rim. The mouth is free-blown and smooth; the body is dip mold–blown and decorated with 20 ribs, vertical at the top and on the toe, and S-shaped along the body. Mark of a solid pontil (W. 1 cm) is visible on the bottom.

## Comparanda

No direct comparanda were found, but this flask can be connected to the free-blown tubular jars produced in the Syro-Palestinian region between the fourth and fifth centuries ([[Stern 2001]], pp. 255–257, nos. 141–143) and the double kohl tubes from Palestine of the late fourth to the sixth centuries ([[Barag 1970a]], vol. 2, plate 39, type 12; [[Stern 2001]], pp. 317–320, nos. 179–182); both groups were decorated with spirally wound fine trails, in a fashion quite similar to the effect of the oblique mold-blown ribbing on 2003.342. Furthermore, the vessel can also be associated with the conical flasks with similar handles from Palestine ([[Barag 1970a]], vol. 2, plate 37, type 10:4-1, 511).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 180, no. 497.

## Exhibitions

None