---
label: "417"
title: "Miniature Flask"
layout: entry
order: 1090
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-417"
---

## Condition

Some weathering and milky iridescence. A fragment of the neck has been reattached.

## Description

Vertical rim; wide, short neck; horizontal shoulder; cylindrical body; flat bottom. The vessel is made of a thick mass of glass and bears wheel-cut decoration. The upper neck and rim area are cut into a seven-faceted profile. In addition, the following motif is repeated four times around the body: two vertical grooves flank a diagonally set square with a horizontal stroke running across its center.

On the lower, cylindrical part of the neck a groove is faintly visible, possibly a tooling mark. At the center of the flat bottom the circular scar of a solid pontil (W. ca. 1 cm) is visible.

## Comments and Comparanda

This type of miniature cylindrical flask in decolorized glass with cut decoration is dated to the ninth–tenth centuries CE. Sites with published parallels include the following: Sabra al-Mansuriyya, Tunisia ({% cite 'Foy 2020' %}, p. 81, type Sb18, fig. 34), Beit She’an ({% cite 'Hadad 2005' %}, pp. 44–45, plate 41:856), Hama ({% cite 'Riis 1957' %}, p. 531, fig. 141), Fustat ({% cite 'Scanlon and Pinder-Wilson 2001' %}, pp. 92, 94, fig. 42c), Samarra ({% cite 'Lamm 1928' %}, p. 73, no. 215), Susa ({% cite 'Lamm 1931' %}, p. 366, plate LXXIX:5; {% cite 'Lamm 1930' %}, p. 156, plate 58:10), and Nishapur ({% cite 'Kröger 1995' %}, p. 150, no. 201). One bottle is in the Benaki Museum ({% cite 'Clairmont 1977' %}, p. 93, plate XVII no. 311), one in the Corning Museum of Glass ({% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, p. 107, no. 791), and one in the Israel Museum ({% cite 'Brosh 2003' %}, p. 370, no. 506).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 260, no. 762.

## Exhibitions

None