---
label: "354"
title: "Two-Handled Flask"
layout: entry
order: 932
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-354"
---

## Condition

Intact, with some weathering, more on the interior; some pitting and scratches. Several large, elongated bubbles on the surface.

## Description

In-folded, flaring rim; cylindrical neck, constricted at its bottom, forming a mild diaphragm; globular body; flat bottom. Two opposing red handles applied on the shoulder, drawn upward, and attached to the rim. Black striations along the red ground of the handles. Faint yellow spiraling in the green ground of the vessel.

## Comments and Comparanda

Made with florets—segments of mosaic canes— fused together and then free-blown. Each floret is made of green and yellow glass, probably a green matrix with a central yellow layer. The technique was used mainly for small vessels such as jars, cylindrical cups, jugs, and handled cups. The distribution of findspots indicates that they were circulating from Britain through northwestern Europe to the northern coast of the Black Sea. Quite probably they were produced from the late first century until the second half of the second century CE and occasionally they appear in third-century contexts. The pattern, even when appearing as curved lines, was probably made of florets with circles around a central dot. (On the technique see [[Stern 2017]], pp. 132–139; [[Stern and Fünfschilling 2020]], pp. 41–68. The same technique made the handled cup {% cat '2003.287' %}.)

Sprinklers, or dropper flasks, appear in archaeological contexts from the mid-third century onward in the Levantine region and are widespread during the fourth century CE. On sprinklers see comments on {% cat '2003.409' %}. There are some indications that sprinklers were produced earlier, at least from the late second century, on the basis of the “snake-thread” decoration they bore ([[Stern 2001]], p. 166, no. 62). For an opaque yellow, pear-shaped dropper flask dated to the third century see [[Whitehouse 1997a]], p. 200, no. 350. For an opaque yellow jar with two handles dated to the first century CE see [[Whitehouse 1997a]], p. 167, no. 292.

In conclusion, given that as far as we currently know the technique of free-blowing with mosaic florets ceases to be used in the second half of the second century CE, but sprinklers appear at before the middle of the third century CE, probably even at the end of the second century CE, this vessel may be dated around the end of the second century CE.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 112, no. 303; p. 110, plate no. 303.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)
