---
label: "356"
title: "Amphoriskos"
layout: entry
order: 934
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-356"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. Several mended breaks are visible in the body, and some visible incrustation in the interior, probably glue.

## Description

In-folded and flattened, flaring rim; cylindrical neck; ovoid body, standing on a flat, slightly concave bottom. No pontil mark is visible on the bottom. Two coil handles are applied on the shoulder and pulled up to the upper neck, where the coil was bent twice and the minuscule, fine end of it was cracked off, as is visible from its free, flying endings. One of the handles was placed higher than the other. In the lower handle a striation of opaque white glass is visible, suggesting the color of other products of this workshop or the decoration on them.

## Comments and Comparanda

This form is a small-sized tableware glass vessel that originated in the Tiberian-Claudian period and remained in use until the end of the first century CE ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 32–34, form 15; {% cite 'Biaggio-Simona 1991' %}, vol. 1, pp. 209–213; {% cite 'Vessberg 1952' %}, pp. 142–143, 163, amphorisk B1; {% cite 'Goethert-Polaschek 1977' %}, pp. 225–227, form 133). Published parallels connect this form to northern Italy and the Ticino region in Switzerland. For amphoriskoi with splashware, see comments on {% cat '2003.291' %}. See also comments on {% cat '2003.368' %}.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 198, no. 545.

## Exhibitions

None