---
label: "361"
title: "Amphoriskos"
layout: entry
order: 939
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-361"
---

## Condition

One handle is missing. Areas with incrustation.

## Description

Fire-polished rim; conical mouth; cylindrical neck; cylindrical body mildly tapering toward the flat, concave bottom. An annular pontil mark (W. 1.3, Th. 0.2 cm) is visible on the bottom. A fine thread is wound under the rim. Two opposing, smooth strap handles start on the tip of the shoulder stretch, vertically, and bend to the very top of the neck. The body of the second handle is not preserved.

The entire body is decorated with applied, curving, smooth threads of various thicknesses which form a snake-thread pattern. Two long-necked and long-legged birds, probably aquatic, in profile turning to the right. In front of each bird is a fine thread that forms numerous loops stretching from shoulder to bottom, bends under it, and returns, ending on the shoulder.

## Comments and Comparanda

Snake-thread vessels were first produced in late second century CE in the eastern Mediterranean, and the technique was transported soon after to the western provinces, where at least two workshops were active, one in Rhineland and the other in Pannonia ([[Harden et al. 1987]], pp. 105–108; [[Stern 2001]], p. 138; [[Dévai 2019]], pp. 325–329). The vessels are grouped stylistically, those with freely applied trails, and the “flower and bird” variety, named after its representations. Eastern examples are made of and mostly decorated with colorless glass; the trails often bear crosshatched lines, and the “flower and bird” pattern is found only among them ([[Barag 1969]]). Colored trails appear in the decoration of western products much more often, and the trails sometimes are not smooth when they bear single lines and not crosshatched ones. An almost identical vessel is in the Corning Museum of Glass (64.1.17: [[Whitehouse 2001a]], p. 223, no. 796)

As to the shape of the vessel, this form of small, undecorated amphoriskos ([[Isings 1957]], pp. 157–158, form 127 miniature version) is known from sites in both eastern and western Roman provinces, and is dated from the third and fourth centuries ([[Antonaras 2017]], p. 157, form 138, wherein further finds, mostly from the Balkans, are cited; also see [[Whitehouse 2001a]], p. 184, no. 729).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 226, no. 663.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)