---
label: "370"
title: "Quadripartite Kohl Tube"
layout: entry
order: 963
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-370"
---

## Condition

Intact.

## Description

The vessel comprises two glass tubes, each bent at the middle and fused together, forming a four-compartment body on a flat bottom. The tubes have in-folded, slightly everted rims. At the center of the bottom is a solid, circular pontil mark (W. 1.7 cm). A fine thread is wound spirally 21 times around the body. On the four corners of the vessel a thick trail stretches from the bottom to the rim, looped eight to nine times against the body. A pair of vertical basket handles rise from the rims, bridged at the top by a third handle, perpendicular to them. At mid-height the handles are bridged with a pair of smaller basket handles placed on opposite sides.

## Comments and Comparanda

On kohl tubes, see comments on {% cat '2003.431' %}. In addition, for direct comparanda, see {% cite 'Harden 1964' %}, p. 53, fig. 12, top right; {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 39, type XII:9; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 320, no. 182; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 283, no. 441.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern 1968' %}, p. 18, no. 29.

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 232, no. 681b.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

Meisterwerke der Glaskunst aus internationalem Privatbesitz (Düsseldorf, 1968–1969)