---
label: "232"
title: "Plate"
layout: entry
order: 711
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-232"
---

## Condition

Intact. Iridescence and some areas with incrustation. An elongated notch, probably a broken air bubble, on the interior near the rim at the area of maximum diameter, where letter Γ is.

## Description

Oval plate with fire-polished rim; shallow, conical body; applied, band-shaped, conical base-ring.

Incised decoration on the exterior: the word ΥΓΕΙΑ (“health”) in capital Greek letters. The letters are formed with double, parallel lines. The letters are arranged loosely around the plate, and each one of them is surrounded by four parallel slanting strokes. In the area in front of the Υ a wheat stalk with an ear of five rows of kernels. On the interior of the bottom a motif that can be understood as another wheat stalk.

## Comparanda

This plate belongs to a quite diverse group of vessels, which include several different shapes—beakers, shallow bowls or dishes, globular flasks or bottles, and one jug—which were decorated with incised decoration and inscriptions with double-line lettering. Finds are dated between the third and fifth centuries CE, mostly to the fourth century CE. It was widely distributed, and it has been proposed that they were produced in a number of dispersed workshops, predominantly in the eastern Mediterranean, western Asia Minor, and Egypt, but also probably Cologne as well ([[Fremersdorf 1967]], pp. 105–108, plates 104–109; [[Harden 1967/1968]], pp. 43–55; [[Grose 1985]], pp. 23–28; [[Stern 2001]], pp. 137–138, 160–161; [[Lightfoot 2013b]], pp. 358–362).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], pp. 118, no. 520.

[[Lightfoot 1990]], app. no. 12.

[[Wight 2011]], pp. 77, 91, fig. 64.

[[Lightfoot 2013b]], p. 357, no. 15.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)