---
label: "113"
title: "Fragment of a Mosaic Glass Vessel"
layout: entry
order: 388
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-113"
---

## Condition

Single body fragment.

## Description

Small, curved body fragment, irregular polygonal florets in dark blue background. Each floret has a central red set in white, green and yellow layers surrounded by a white layer with red triangular rays in it.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique see comments on [85.AF.85](#cat). On the trade of small fragments of mosaic glass in the nineteenth century and on the different techniques and classes of mosaic glass present in the JPGM collection, see comments on [76.AF.70.21](#cat).

The shape of the tesserae, with the dentate band, is not present among the Roman mosaic vessels. For a small piece of glass that was made of tesserae probably identical to those of 76.AF.70.17 and was ground in the shape of a human incisor set in gold frame used as a pendant dated to the tenth century CE see [[Antonaras 2019]], pp. 186–187, no. 246. The mosaic technique was revived for a brief period during the ninth and tenth centuries, creating what was probably a very limited and clearly costly production line whose creations were nevertheless widely distributed from Egypt to Iran ([[Carboni and Whitehouse 2001a]], pp. 147–153; [[Goldstein et al. 2005]], pp. 86–87).

## Provenance

By 1976, Bruce McNall, donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1976

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None