---
label: "268"
title: "Pointed Amphoriskos"
layout: entry
order: 772
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-268"
---

## Condition

Intact. Small areas with milky crust; some impurities; few pinprick bubbles and several, larger, elongated air bubbles, particularly visible on the neck area.

## Description

Fire-polished, slightly flaring rim; cylindrical neck; horizontal shoulder; truncated, conical body; pointed, convex bottom. Pair of peacock blue, angular, coil handles from shoulder to mid-neck. Peacock blue coil wound once around neck at level of handles’ attachment—apparently placed before the handles were attached. At the center of the bottom is an annular pontil mark (W. 1.5, Th. 0.1 cm).

## Comments and Comparanda

Small glass amphorae rendering in miniature the shape of large clay amphorae were quite popular and were used as tableware for serving wine. This vessel belongs to a distinctive group of Syro-Palestinian glass table amphorae, appearing in four different types, which have been dated to the fourth and fifth centuries CE ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85). This particular vessel, due to its tall, tubular neck that is not constricted at its base, is ascribed to type I or II. The slightly flaring rim led us to ascribe it to the rarer type II. In particular, on the basis of its long conical body, the absence of a base, and the presence of a decorative coil halfway down neck, it is ascribed to type IIA2a ({% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85). The findspots indicate that these vessels may have been produced in Syria, possibly in the fourth century CE ({% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, p. 110, no. 411, plate 25; {% cite 'Stern 1977' %}, pp. 84–85, type IIA2a; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, no. 98, p. 208; {% cite 'Barag 1970a' %}, vol. 2, plate 37, type 10.2; {% cite 'Dekoulakou 1976' %}, p. 103, plate 81:β, γ; {% cite 'Papageorgiou 2014' %}, p. 447, no. 130; cf. {% cite 'Matheson 1980' %}, pp. 86–87, no. 234; {% cite 'Weinberg and Stern 2009' %}, pp. 150–151, no. 356; {% cite 'Williams and Zervos 1983' %}, p. 24, no. 64, plate 10; {% cite 'Antonaras 2022' %}, pp. 67–68, 118, nos. 431–432).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 214, no. 618.

## Exhibitions

None