---
label: "279"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 791
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-279"
---

## Condition

Mended; fully preserved. Weathering has given it a blue-purple iridescence; incrustation occurs on the inside and under the foot.

## Description

Fire-polished, flaring rim; short neck; and hemispherical body that folds, forming a very high, domed bottom. This type of bottom reduces the capacity of the flask to a mere fraction of what it externally appears to contain. It has been previously interpreted as a stemmed beaker, but the fact that the rim remains open and fully usable indicates that the vessel actually was shaped and finished as a flask. No pontil mark on the bottom, but also no constriction on the base of the neck.

## Comments and Comparanda

This vessel, with its minuscule capacity and ability to stand on either end, can be regarded as a trinket or trick vessel. A well-dated example from Slovenia dates the form to the second half of the first century CE ({% cite 'Lazar 2003' %}, 3.7.3, fig. 33, pp. 103, 108, from a Flavian-era grave), as does another, contemporaneous one from the ancient necropolis of Zadar in Croatia ({% cite 'Eterović Borzić and Štefanac 2021' %}, p. 447, no. 1442). Other published examples are from the Newark Museum ({% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 91, no. 98, dated to the first–second centuries CE) and the Royal Ontario Museum ({% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, p. 53, no. 117, plate 8, dated to probably the second or early third century CE). Finally, a vessel similar in concept has been interpreted as a goblet tentatively dated to the fourth–sixth centuries, although an earlier or later date was not excluded; it belongs to the Corning Museum of Glass ({% cite 'Whitehouse 1997a' %}, p. 106, no. 159).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 241, no. 708.

## Exhibitions

None