---
label: "272"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 784
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-272"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved; small dull and iridescent areas.

## Description

Cut-off, vertical rim; cylindrical neck with a constriction at its base; squat body; fine, pinched ring-base; flat bottom. Bears faint incised decoration. A fine horizontal band around the rim, one 0.5 cm below it, two more at mid-neck height; three concentric bands (W. 00.2, 1, 0.5 cm, respectively) on the upper body, and one more (W. 0.2 cm) on the lower body.

## Comments and Comparanda

This form is very close to a widely distributed spherical flask form like [2004.39](#num) ([[Isings 1957]], pp. 121–122, form 103; [[Antonaras 2009]], pp. 190–92, form 50) regarding the shaping of the rim and neck, their main difference being that the originally spherical body was pressed to flattened into a lentoid shape. In addition to the fine incising some examples are decorated with indentations around the body, also known in decolorized glass ([[Foy et al. 2018]], vol. 2, p. 249, IN 249). Examples with a pushed-in ring-base, like 2003.390, and others without a base are known, and they are made either of greenish or decolorized glass ([[Fremersdorf and Polónyi-Fremersdorf 1984]], p. 53, no. 129 \[example without base\]; [[Doppelfeld 1966]], p. 52, plates 98–99 \[four examples with pushed-in ring-base\]; [[Kunina 1997]], pp. 298–299, no. 223 \]example with pushed-in ring-base\]). They are dated to the third century CE, and it has been assumed that they are products of the Rhine region.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 208, no. 587.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)