---
label: "302"
title: "Jug"
layout: entry
order: 825
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-302"
---

## Condition

Intact. Visible areas with iridescence, mainly in the interior.

## Description

Fire-polished rim; conical mouth; cylindrical neck, wider toward the body. Convex shoulders; conical body, standing on an irregular, pushed-in, and flattened ring-base. The lower part of the body is mildly distorted in one place due to some mishap in the formation of the base. A thick annular pontil mark (W. 2.2, Th. up to 0.7 cm) on the bottom. A strap handle, mostly purplish—only a small part is bluish-greenish—in a different hue than that of the body, starts on the shoulder, stretches almost vertically to the height of the rim, where it bends, and attaches on the mouth and under the rim. The edges of the handle appear to be raised due to a deep and wide groove that runs along the central part of the handle. One purplish coil is wound twice under the rim, and another one is wound once around the base of the neck.

## Comments and Comparanda

Jugs of this form are known among fourth-century vessels from western sites ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 150–151, form 120b). In addition, dip mold–blown parallels are known mainly from the Balkans and Trier ({% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 121–122, form 84), also dated to the fourth century CE.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 232, no. 682.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)