---
label: "291"
title: "Jug"
layout: entry
order: 814
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-291"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved; part of the base and of the thread on the shoulder are missing.

## Description

Fire-polished rim; conical mouth; cylindrical neck, wider toward the sloping shoulder that leads to the everted conical body; slightly concave bottom. The vessel stands on an applied ring-base made of a thick coil of white glass. Thick, white coil is wound under the rim and a fine thread is wound four times at the transition to the shoulder. A fine, coil handle made of white glass with bluish striation in it is applied on the shoulder and ends on the coil under the rim.

## Comparanda

The shape of the vessel, as well as the applied base and the decorative thread around the neck, are very well-known among jugs dated in the third–fourth centuries CE ([[Isings 1957]], p. 152, form 121a; [[Antonaras 2017]], pp. 125–126, forms 88, 90–92,, wherein several parallels are cited). Nevertheless, this small jug shares the colors of several first-century translucent dark blue vessels with opaque white handles, bases, or purely decorative threads and coils, such as kantharos [84.AF.30](#num), trefoil flask [2003.373](#num), flasks [2003.415](#num), [2003.418](#num), and amphoriskos [2003.368](#num) ([[Stern 2001]], p. 70, no. 13; [[Antonaras 2017]], p. 138, form 112, no. 460, where other parallels are cited).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 203, no. 570.

## Exhibitions

None