---
label: "122"
title: "Mosaic Bowl"
layout: entry
order: 406
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-122"
---

## Condition

A number of repaired breaks visible, and there are some nicks and scratches. Some discoloration and weathering on the exterior surface, in addition to pitting, which has produced the rough appearance of the surface.

## Description

The bowl has a slightly flaring lip; conical, cyma recta body; and flat bottom. It stands on a tall, circular ring-base formed by an applied coil of glass.

The vessel is made of discoid mosaic tesserae of a single type, composed of fine white rods surrounded by brownish translucent glass. Some of the tesserae on the exterior have been fused almost vertically, probably as a result of movement during action of the slumping technique, so that the white rods appear elongated, as short, wavy white threads in the dark-colored body of the vessel. In the interior they mostly appear in cross section as white spots.

## Comments and Comparanda

This bowl belongs to the Roman Cast Composite Mosaic Vessels group, and in particular to the Non-Carinated Bowls ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, pp. 258–261), which are one of the largest groups of mosaic vessels, with deep and shallow bowls being among the most widely appearing forms; others include plates and beakers. For the production technique see {% cite 'Dawes 2002' %} and comments on {% cat '85.AF.85' %}. Broad, shallow bowls similar in shape are in the collection of the Toledo Museum of Art ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, nos. 539–540).

## Provenance

Friedrich Ludwig von Gans, German, 1833–1920 (Frankfurt, Germany); Kurt Walter Bachstitz Gallery, founded 1920, dissolved 1951; 1929, Baurat Schiller [sold, Sammlung Baurat Schiller, Rudolph Lepke’s Kunst-Auctions-Haus, Berlin, March 19, 1929, lot 587]; Pierre Mavrogordato, Greek, 1870–1948 (Berlin, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 118, no. 313; p. 115, plate no. 313.

## Exhibitions

None