---
label: "119"
title: "Mosaic Bowl"
layout: entry
order: 403
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-119"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved; mended and filled.

## Description

The bowl has a flaring lip, conical, cyma recta body, and flat bottom and stands on a tall, splaying ring-base, formed by a single revolt of an applied coil of glass.

The vessel is made of rectangular mosaic tesserae, monochrome yellow, white, and blue with a thin white layer in the middle. In addition, discoid sections have been used composed of a central white rod set in blue, around which have been spirally wound 1.5 revolts of a translucent yellowish ground with a thin layer of opaque yellow glass on it. The lip of the rim is a twisted cane of transparent glass around which is twisted a very fine white thread.

The coil of the base is ribbon mosaic comprising wavy but parallel layers of blue, white, and yellow glass.

## Comparanda

This bowl belongs to a group of late Hellenistic glass mosaic vessels, examples of which have been recovered from a shipwreck that sank ca. 80 BCE off the island of Antikythera in the Aegean, loaded with diverse cargo traveling from the eastern Mediterranean to Italy ({% cite 'Kaltsas, Vlachogianni, and Bouyia 2012' %}, with all previous bibliography). This particular shape of bowl with flaring rim is among the least represented among the late Hellenistic mosaic vessels ({% cite 'Oliver 1968' %}, pp. 56–57; {% cite 'Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994' %}, pp. 300–301, no. 87). It was made with ribbon and mosaic-patterned glass, as was one from Tripoli, Libya Museum ({% cite 'Oliver 1968' %}, pp. 56). A similar striped mosaic example in the British Museum ({% cite 'Tatton-Brown and Andrews 1991' %}, p. 56, color plate 65) is said to be from one of the Greek islands. In addition, there are vessels made with millefiori mosaic (example from Antikythera Group: {% cite 'Weinberg 1965' %}, pp. 35–36, nos. 4, 6, figs. 11, 14; {% cite 'Weinberg and McClellan 1992' %}, p. 108, no. 66; {% cite 'Avronidaki 2012' %}, pp. 143–144, no. 105) and network glass ({% cite 'Oliver 1968' %}, p. 57, fig. 11; {% cite 'Lightfoot 2019' %}, pp. 169–170, fig. 3).

## Provenance

Stroganoff Collection (Rome, Italy); by 1914, Giorgio Sangiorgi, Italian, 1886–1965 (Rome, Italy); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Sangiorgi 1914' %}, p. 62, nr. 218, plate XLI.

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, pp. 117–118, no. 312; pp. 116, plate no. 312.

Noted in {% cite 'Oliver 1968' %}, p. 57, no. 2.

## Exhibitions

-   Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

-   Reflecting Antiquity: Modern Glass Inspired by Ancient Rome (Malibu, 2007–2008)