---
label: "125"
title: "Fragment of a Mosaic Glass Vessel"
layout: entry
order: 409
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-125"
---

## Condition

Fragment.

## Description

Deep hemispherical bowl. The body is formed by bent, twisted ribbon canes arranged in pairs of the following two types: (1) reticella of two yellow threads twisted around a colorless ground; (2) twisted cane of a white thread wound around purple ground. The rim is finished with an applied twisted coil of white and blue glass.

## Comments and Comparanda

This bowl belongs to a relatively rare class of mosaic ware found mostly in Italy and neighboring regions. It is known as Network Mosaic, or reticella, and is made exclusively of cut lengths of single-network canes placed and fused next to each other and then sagged over a former mold. It is closely related to the striped mosaic wares with parallel-row pattern and appear in shallow and deep bowls and possibly in pyxides too. This type of reticella derives from a group of Hellenistic glass mosaic vessels where the stripes were spirally arranged, with known examples from the Canosa Group ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, pp. 189–191) and the Antikythera Group ({% cite 'Weinberg 1965' %}, pp. 38–39, nos. 10–11, figs. 20–25; [[Weinberg 1992]], pp. 108–110, nos. 71–74; {% cite 'Avronidaki 2012' %}, pp. 143–144, nos. 110–113, wherein all earlier bibliography). Most published Roman examples are made of colorless canes wound spirally with one or two threads, and the rims are formed with an applied twisted cane, usually of an intense color, contrasting with the transparency of the body. The presence of an added twisted thread as a rim links these classes with Hellenistic glass vessels like {% cat '2004.23' %}. For general information on the class and parallels, see {% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, pp. 253, 302–303, nos. 400–403, 405. In addition, published parallels are known from sites such as Vindonissa (dated to the Claudian or Neronian period; [[Burger 1960]], pp. 9–13, nos. 4–5, plate 1), Cologne ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, p. 196, fig. 111), and Lebanon ({% cite '*Glass from the Ancient World* 1957' %}, pp. 88–89, no. 147 [not recorded in the checklist of later owners that was published in the *Journal of Glass Studies* 3 (1961): 19–153]), as well as in museum collections, including the Fitzwilliam Museum ({% cite 'Fitzwilliam 1978' %}, p. 28, no. 45); the Museo Nazionale Romano (294080 [deep]), the Louvre ({% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2000' %}, p. 149 and note 23), the Landesmuseum Württemberg ({% cite 'Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994' %}, p. 299), and the Corning Museum of Glass ({% cite 'Goldstein 1979' %}, p. 32 and 193–195, nos. 523–528: <https://www.cmog.org/artwork/lace-mosaic-bowl-0> [shallow]; <https://www.cmog.org/artwork/fragment-laced-mosaic-bowl-0>; <https://www.cmog.org/artwork/fragment-laced-mosaic-bowl-7>; <https://www.cmog.org/artwork/fragment-laced-mosaic-bowl-8>).

## Provenance

Pierre Mavrogordato, Greek, 1870–1948 (Berlin, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 123, no. 332.

## Exhibitions

None