---
label: "127"
title: "Fragment of a Mosaic Glass Vessel"
layout: entry
order: 411
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-127"
---

## Condition

Fragment.

## Description

Deep hemispherical bowl.

The body was formed by obliquely arranged single-colored bands in the following order: blue, turquoise, and white. The rim is finished with an applied twisted coil of purple and white glass.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique see comments on {% cat '85.AF.85' %}. On the trade of small fragments of mosaic glass in nineteenth-century Rome and on the different techniques and classes of mosaic glass present in the JPGM collection, see comments on {% cat '76.AF.70.21' %}. This bowl belongs to a relatively rare class of mosaic ware, Striped Mosaic ware, found mostly in Italy and neighboring regions. It is known as “parallel-row pattern” glass and is made exclusively of cut lengths of single network canes placed and fused next to each other and then sagged over a former mold. On the sagging technique see {% cite 'Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994' %}, pp. 68–69. Both shallow and deep bowls were produced with this technique. For general information on the class and parallels see {% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, pp. 284–292, nos. 318–354. For a parallel production see comments on {% cat '2003.258.3' %}. In addition, published parallels are known from sites such as Vindonissa (dated to the Claudian or Neronian period; [[Burger 1960]], pp. 9–13, nos. 4–5, plate 1).

## Provenance

Pierre Mavrogordato, Greek, 1870–1948 (Berlin, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 123, no. 332.

## Exhibitions

None