---
label: "128"
title: "Fragment of a Mosaic Glass Vessel" 
layout: entry
order: 412
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-128"
---

## Condition

Single fragment.

## Description

Slightly concave body fragment of a mosaic vessel, possibly a bowl. Consists of two kinds of tesserae with ribbed decoration of white, blue, green, and yellow glass: (1) opaque green and yellow bands divided by a thin white layer; (2) a central white band flanked by transparent pinkish, white, and wide dark blue bands. In two cases the way the tessera was fused on the form-mold made the blue band appears to be turquoise.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique see comments on {% cat '85.AF.85' %}. On the trade of small fragments of mosaic glass in nineteenth-century Rome and on the different techniques and classes of mosaic glass present in the JPGM collection, see comments on {% cat '76.AF.70.21' %}. This bowl belongs to a small class of striped mosaic ware, made of short stripes of composite canes, which are very close in terms of colors and combinations of colors to the parallel-row pattern glass, see {% cat '2004.26.9' %}. It has been plausibly proposed by David Grose ([[Grose 1989]], p. 253) that they are made of the leftover clippings of the canes used for the production of the more numerous Parallel-Row class. They are mostly found in Italy and neighboring regions and are made exclusively of cut short lengths of canes placed and fused next to each other and then sagged over a former mold. On the sagging technique see [[Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994]], pp. 68–69. Both shallow and deep bowls as well as pyxides were produced with this technique. For general information on the class and parallels see [[Grose 1989]], pp. 252–253, 295–301, nos. 368–389, 393–397.

## Provenance

Pierre Mavrogordato, Greek, 1870–1948 (Berlin, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 123, no. 332; p. 121, plate no. 332.

## Exhibitions

-   Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)
