---
label: "117"
title: "Alabastron"
layout: entry
order: 401
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-117"
---

## Condition

Mended. Small cavities at the bottom filled. Neck and part of rim not preserved.

## Description

The body at the top ends at a horizontal, flat edge which is ground on the exterior; everted conical body with straight walls tapering toward the rim; convex pointed bottom. The vessel is made from five parallel lengths of canes set horizontally on the body. The canes are set in the following order: dark blue, white, green, white, and blue.

A fine groove or crack is visible along the seams between the bands. The edge of each band is not perfectly straight, and each one is set at a slightly different angle. Along the white band a vertical crack is visible.

## Comments and Comparanda

This alabastron belongs to a very rare group of vessels with juxtaposed sections of glass of contrasting colors forming simple geometric designs. This technique was used for the production of bowls ({% cite 'Oliver 1967' %}, p. 1, figs. 6–9) as well as alabastra. The size and shape of these banded alabastra are almost identical to the gold-band alabastra of Oliver’s ({% cite 'Oliver 1967' %}, pp. 20–22) group A. For comparanda see from Soli, Cyprus, a vessel with blue, white, and blue bands: [[Myres 1899]], p. 104, no. 2808, illustrated in {% cite 'Oliver 1967' %}, p. 19, fig. 10. At the British Museum is another example: a vessel with blue, white, blue bands, and blue neck and rim {% cite 'Tatton-Brown and Andrews 1991' %}, p. 57, fig. 66 right; illustrated in {% cite 'Oliver 1967' %}, pp. 19–20, fig. 11.

## Provenance

A. Vogell (Karlsruhe, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Oliver 1969' %}, p. 17.

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 102, no. 269.

## Exhibitions

-   Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007)
