---
label: "131"
title: "Banded fragment of a Mosaic Glass Vessel Mosaic Fragment"
layout: entry
order: 415
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-131"
---

## Condition

Single fragment, broken all around. The exterior is polished, probably in modern times. The interior is slightly dull.

## Description

The fragment is mildly convex and belongs to the bottom of a vessel, probably a bowl. It is composed of banded mosaic sections placed sparsely in an amber-colored matrix. The banded sections comprise five white and dark blue layers of glass interchangeably arranged. In the interior a reverse formation appears as if there are two layers of decoration, one on each surface over an amber-colored matrix. It is more probable that this is the result of the difference in temperature between the exterior and the interior of the glass during the slumping on the form-mold.

The polished exterior retains parts of a circular groove 3.7 cm wide, and a mishap is also visible at one point on the circumference. The cutter placed the wheel on the exact position to form a perfect circle, but something prevented him from finishing the cut at this point and he continued 3 mm farther, giving to the object a slightly off-center, oval shape. After the breakage of the original vessel, it appears that its pieces were retrieved and repurposed as valuable decorative elements and this particular fragment was used as a gem or inlay. In the notch around it is visible a thick layer of weathering probably indicative of some kind of metal setting covering that area for an extended period of time.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique see comments on {% cat '85.AF.85' %}. On the various types of mosaic vessels present in the JPGM collection see comments on {% cat '76.AF.70.21' %}. This vessel belongs to a group of early Roman glass vessels, almost exclusively bowls, deeper or shallow, and occasionally pyxides, distinguished by the applied, twisted coil that formed their rim, and by a body almost always made of lengths of composite canes. It can be ascribed to a very small group known as “Short Strip Mosaic Vessels” ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, family II: pp. 252–253, nos. 368–369); see comments on {% cat '2003.258.3' %}. For fragments of mosaic vessels used as insets in jewelry, see {% cite 'Voroniatov 2020' %}, pp. 281–287.

## Provenance

Pierre Mavrogordato, Greek, 1870–1948 (Berlin, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 123, no. 332; p. 121, plate no. 332.

## Exhibitions

None