---
label: "367"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 952
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-367"
---

## Condition

Intact; some incrustations; few pinprick bubbles.

## Description

In-folded, tubular, everted rim; long, slightly lopsided, cylindrical neck; sloping shoulder with smooth transition to the ovoid body; pushed-in, conical base; flat bottom. Slanting tooling marks are visible on the base. No pontil mark is visible. A thread is wound in a spiral ten times around neck. A thicker, flattened thread is wound once around the lower part of the neck. After the application of threads, two pairs of handles were added. One pair of coil handles extends from shoulder to rim, looped one time against the neck, forming two arches. A second, opposing pair of coil handles extends also from shoulder to rim and is looped twice against the neck, forming a longer arch from shoulder to mid–high neck and two, smaller arches on the upper part of the neck.

## Comments and Comparanda

Tall, multihandled flasks with a distinctively elongated neck decorated with a spirally wound fine thread and multiple coil handles applied to the shoulder and attached halfway up the neck, and occasionally pulled up to the rim, belong to a small group of vessels that has been proposed to be products of the same workshop that produced the kohl tubes in inland Palestine, in Galilee, or the Jordan valley ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 270). For parallels see {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 150, no. 208; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 308, no. 171; {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 265, no. 351. For an example without base and decorative coil see {% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 219, no. 454.

## Provenance

1936, Robert Weeks de Forest, American, 1848–1931 and Emily Johnston de Forest, 1851–1942 [sold, Anderson Galleries, Inc., New York, January 30, 1936, lot 347]; 1940, Harry Leonard Simmons [sold, Parke Bernet Galleries, Inc., New York, April 5, 1940, lot 137, through French and Co. to J. Paul Getty]; 1940–1976, J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, upon his death, held in trust by the estate; 1976–1978, Estate of J. Paul Getty, American, 1892–1976, distributed to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1978

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Anderson Galleries 1936b' %}.

{% cite 'Parke-Bernet Galleries 1940' %}, lot 137, ill.

{% cite 'Stothart 1965' %}, p. 20, no. F-8.

## Exhibitions

None