---
label: "223"
title: "Sprinkler Flask"
layout: entry
order: 674
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-223"
---

## Condition

Intact; iridescence.

## Description

In-folded, tubular, flaring rim; wide, conical mouth; cylindrical neck, wider toward the body. A constriction at the transition from the neck to the body forms a diaphragm. The globular body is covered with 22 well-defined, S-shaped mold-blown ribs. The vessel stands on a flat, slightly concave bottom. Annular pontil mark (W. 2.4, Th. 0.1 cm) is visible at the center of the bottom.

## Comparanda

Vessels with a diaphragm formed at the bottom of the neck are known as sprinklers or dropper flasks due to the fact that the diaphragm allowed only individual drops of the fluid content to flow through it. In addition to flasks, jars and amphoriskoi were occasionally finished as sprinklers. They are often decorated with mold-blown and cut motifs, pinched fins, and applied trails, and they mostly appear in the Levant, Syria, eastern Palestine, and Mesopotamia, indicating a production site in the region, although a workshop seems to have been operating in Cologne that specialized in snake-thread decoration. Sprinklers appeared in the third century CE, and continued in the fourth and even probably into the early fifth century CE ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 152–153). Other sprinklers see {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, pp. 91–93, nos. 106–110, esp. pp. 109–110, no. 108, wherein is further bibliography. Even closer parallels are the following: {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 120, no. 621; {% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, p. 78, no. 282; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 254, no. 140.

## Provenance

1971, Royal Athena Galleries (New York, New York), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1971

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Du Bois 2003' %}, pp. 285–286, fig. 8.

## Exhibitions

None
