---
label: "225"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 676
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-225"
---

## Condition

In fair condition. Surface bears a slight iridescent sheen on the body and some flaking on the neck.

## Description

The vessel was initially blown in a small, slightly conical mold with 19 vertical ribs. Fire-polished, vertical rim; wide, conical mouth; short neck—actually a constriction at the transition from the mouth to the body. The upper part of the body is cylindrical and the lower is bulbous; both covered with mold-blown ribs, well-defined and vertical on the upper part, faint and S-shaped on the lower part. The vessel stands on a flat, slightly concave bottom. No pontil mark is visible on the bottom.

A thick coil is wound once around the mouth at mid-height. A fine thread is spirally wound 10 times around the lower part of the mouth.

## Comments and Comparanda

Free- and mold-blown vessels of this particular shape, decorated with thick and thin trails of glass around the mouth, are known from eastern Mediterranean sites: {% cite 'Dussart 1998' %}, p. 150, form BX 42, plate 42, from Kerak, dated between the fifth and seventh centuries CE; {% cite 'Kraeling 1962' %}, p. 270, plate 64b, bottom, center, a find from Ptolemais from a post-fourth-century fill. Unprovenanced examples include one in the Newark Art Museum ({% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 217, no. 440); unpublished flask from the Toledo Museum of Art (no. 1923.1322). In addition, for a free-blown but very similar example from Israel, dated between the fifth and seventh centuries CE, see {% cite 'Barag 1974' %}, p. 13*, fig. 2:7, plate XXVII:5; for an unprovenanced, smooth example see {% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 129, no. 161; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 305, no. 168; {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 172, no. 190; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 162, no. 230.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 179, no. 496.

## Exhibitions

None
