---
label: "220"
title: "Amphora with Indentations"
layout: entry
order: 671
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-220"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. A fracture on the neck and shoulder; faint layer of iridescence on the exterior and reddish incrustation in the interior.

## Description

In-folded, tubular rim; conical mouth; cylindrical neck with a slight constriction at its base; biconical body ending in a small, convex bottom. A thick turquoise coil has been wound three times under the bottom, forming a base disk. On the body are visible faint, dip mold–blown ribs, slanting from left to right. In addition, ten deep, vertical indentations are around the body from shoulder to bottom. Two turquoise coil handles start on the shoulder and end at mid-neck height.

Small glass amphoras rendering in miniature the shape of large clay amphoras were quite popular, and they were used as tableware for serving wine. This vessel belongs to a distinctive group of Syro-Palestinian glass table amphoras, appearing in four different types, which have been dated to the fourth and fifth centuries CE ([[Stern 1977]], pp. 84–85). This particular vessel, due to its tall, tubular neck, which is constricted at its base, is ascribed to type III. Like the majority of examples of this type, it is dip mold–blown, with spiraling ribbing and elongated indentations along the body. On the basis of its long, conical body, the presence of a base, and the absence of a decorative coil halfway down neck it is ascribed to type IIIB1b ([[Stern 1977]], pp. 84–85, fig. 3). The findspots indicate that these may have been produced in Palestine, possibly beginning in the first half of the fourth century CE ([[Barag 1970a]], vol. 2, plate 37, type 10.5 (variant); [[Auth 1976]], p. 131, no. 164; [[Bomford 1976]], no. 164; [[Oliver 1980]], p. 124, no. 218; [[Stern 2001]], pp. 146–149, nos. 100–101).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 219, no. 636.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)