---
label: "567"
title: "Two Chain Links, Possibly Part of a Necklace"
layout: entry
order: 2201
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-567"
---

## Condition

Bronze parts are heavily corroded. Surface of the glass is clear and not weathered in both examples. 2003.295.2 is missing one part of the double loop. Glass medallion of 2003.295.2 is cracked.

## Description

Bronze medallion with gold-glass inset. Each medallion is made of a round bronze sheet from which emerge, on the two opposite sides, one and two, respectively, bands/strips, which have been folded to create loops. A fine band has been soldered on the periphery of the round sheet, forming a ring into which the gold-glass has been placed.

Remains of iron wire can be seen in the double loop of medallion .

Only one band of the double link of the second medallion (2003.295.2) is preserved, and the area from which the second band broke away is visible.

It is evident that the single link was fitted into the space in the middle of the double link, while an iron wire passed through the three links. which ensured the cohesion of the “chain.”

The two gold-glass medallions are [[grozzed]] all around, following the shape of the bronze band in which they are inset. A cut gold foil was placed under the glass, depicting a bird in profile to the right, perched on a horizontal bar, apparently a branch. The birds have round head, large eye, and curved beak; they are similar but not identical. The birds are formed by cutting and scratching a gold foil to the desired shape. The foil is secured between two layers of clear-colored glass which were set in a bronze circular ring. The grozzed outline of the glass medallion was covered with a substance, which is still quite clearly visible on one of them.

## Comparanda

On gold-band and gold-glass objects, see comments on {% cat '2003.229' %}. No exact parallels have been located. For a bronze case for a wax sealing decorated with gold-glass decoration from Thessaloniki, Greece, see [[Veleni and Ignatiadou 2010]], p. 257, no. 167, dated to the second half of the first century CE. For a bronze ring in the British Museum with a gold foil with chi-rho monogram under a layer of glass dated to the fourth century CE, see {% cite 'Howells 2015' %}, p. 12, plate3, p. 20. In addition, for gold-glass in general see {% cite 'Morey 1959' %}; {% cite 'von Saldern 2004' %}, pp. 461–474; {% cite 'Howells 2015' %}, pp. 3–16. On the motif of birds see {% cite 'Scarborough and Cutler 1991' %}, pp. 289–290.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 152, no. 398.

## Exhibitions

None