534.2

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of white glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. In the thread hole, the bands appear to have been added onto the central band, which is dark colored. There are three Medusas, in a purple, rectangular outline. At the center of outline’s lower edge is a yellow square. The upper white coil is not perfectly closed. The additional plaques are banded rectangular elements. The one that is not deformed presents a succession of a green, a red, a yellow, a very thin red, and a yellow band.

534.3

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of blue glass, and at the edge of the thread hole is a fine red coil. The face floret visibly reaches the hole, and there is probably no matrix, just the florets one next to the other; the bands around the thread hole were added for extra strength and to cover the profile of the mosaic sections. There are three female faces wearing necklaces with long hair on their nude shoulders, outlined by a green square. The additional plaques are aligned in four rows of red lozenges flanked on either side by a white, yellow, and another white row of lozenges, which are framed by a row of red triangular tesserae pointing toward the interior of the plaque.

534.4

The upper and lower parts of the bead appear black now but were originally dark green. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. In the thread hole, the bands appear to have been added onto the central band, which is dark colored. There are three female busts with short hair and necklaces, in a now-white, most probably purple field, outlined in red. The additional plaques are three squares, each filled with four triangular elements facing to the center: two yellow facing each other, and one red and one green facing each other.

534.5

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of green glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. In the thread hole, the bands appear to have been added onto the central band, which is dark colored. There are five Medusas, outlined in a white and blue square frame. There are no additional plaques.

534.6

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. In the thread hole, the red bands appear to have been added onto the central band, which is a dark-colored green. There are two hairless faces with open mouths, outlined in a light blue, planoconvex frame that is straight on the upper part and curved on the lower part and sides. The additional plaques are two four-petaled rosettes. A central white square is set in red, surrounded by four wedge-shaped, white petals set in translucent green, surrounded by four outer, red wavy petals set in a round blue matrix.

534.7

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of green glass. The base mass is invisible, and in the entire thread hole only one type of glass is visible, which is a dark-colored (possibly blue) glass. There are four female heads with short blue hair, set in a gray, square frame. There are no additional plaques.

534.8

The upper and lower parts are made of green glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The entire thread hole is covered with a dark, seemingly black color that appears to continue under the light green bands that encircle it. There are three faces outlined in square, white and blue frames. Two faces are consecutively placed and the third is flanked by the checkerboard tiles. The additional plaques are three polychrome mosaic squares made of triangular microtesserae: a central translucent green square surrounded by four red triangular tesserae facing outward and forming thus a lozenge, which is surrounded by a yellow and a dark-colored—probably dark blue—lozenge and white, red, and by white tesserae forming triangles.

534.9

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of light yellow glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. In the thread hole, the bands appear to have been added onto the central band, which is dark colored. There are four Medusas, in a rectangular white and blue frame set in a larger white lozenge, which is set in a dark blue rectangular field. There are no additional plaques.

534.10

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. There is probably no base mass, and in the thread hole it appears to be black, probably the back side of the mosaic sections. The two bands appear olive-green in some areas, covered with a thin layer of opaque red glass, probably a red that has deteriorated and weathered to green. There are three faces, each surrounded by blue, thin hair, or hairless. They are enclosed in a fine blue frame outlined in white, set in a wide, square blue field. There is an additional plaque with a red band flanked by two yellow bands.

534.11

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. There is no base mass, and at the lower, wider opening the thread hole is red at least to mid-height. On the upper thread hole, an interior gray layer is visible—the same as the one into which the face masks are applied—covered by a red layer. There are two almost-square faces; there is a thin purple layer around the head, set in a wide gray square field. The additional plaques are two oval features that flank the faces. In the center is a rectangular banded bit, with red, white, yellow, and translucent green and blue set in an oval light green. The pattern on the central bit is not understandable but is probably part of a larger motif. The second oval has only a small part of a red and white pattern at the edge, possibly the same with the other one.

534.12

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of dark blue glass. Visible on one side, over the blue, is a fine red band, which has deteriorated into green in large areas. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. In the thread hole, the bands appear to have been added onto the central band, which is dark colored. There are three Medusas in a fine round white and a square red frame. The additional plaques are three squares filled with four triangular elements facing toward the center: two yellow, which face each other, and one red and one green facing each other.

534.13

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible, onto which the two bands are applied. There are three Medusas in a fine white circle set in a dark blue square frame. The additional plaques are three squares filled with four triangular elements facing toward the center: two yellow facing each other and one red and one green facing each other.

534.14

The upper and lower parts are probably dark green. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible, onto which the two bands are applied. There are three female busts with long hair and necklaces in a dark blue, square field. The additional plaques are three rosettes with eleven petals. At the center is a white circle (possibly a different color that has weathered into white) set in red, surrounded by eleven yellow petals, set in translucent purple. The flower shape is inscribed by a red ring with triangular projections in the interior covering the space between the petals. The whole motif is set in a translucent purple field.

534.15

The upper and lower parts are made of turquoise blue glass, and the base mass is also turquoise blue. There are three female faces with short hair, set in a lavender orlight blue, square field. The additional plaques are three rectangular pieces with parts of spiral meander band. In each piece are two yellow waves in a translucent purple background.

534.16

The pendant is arybaloid in shape. It has a spherical body with the thread hole on the neck at the transition to the flat, discoid upper part. It is made of opaque green mass. On the upper surface a red or mosaic core is visible. The base mass is light green. On the upper surface is visible a spiraling red and “black” core. A thread hole that sets the faces on the pendant is off-axis. There are three faces of Medusas in a fine white, round field set in dark blue squares, each one flanked by a rectangular plaque. The additional plaques are three squares filled with four colorful triangular elements facing to the center, each one outlined by translucent greenish glass: two yellow facing each other, and one red and one green facing each other.

534.17

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. The base mass is invisible, possibly red. Both red bands in the interior appear to be applied onto a central band. There are three female busts with long hair and necklaces. There is an opaque red band above and on the sides of the heads. The additional plaque is a vertical banded piece: a central red flanked by yellow bands.

534.18

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. There are four faces; alternately, the following two types of florets: (1) Face set in round white frame set in a blue square; (2) Face set in round white frame, which is set in a blue square, which is set in a larger white lozenge, set in a blue square. There are no additional plaques.

534.19

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. The base mass is red, and the two bands are part of it; onto this was applied the central green band. There are two hairless faces, off-axis, set in green. In one of the sections, hardly noticeable, the green outline is square. The color of this outer layer in the second face section is of the same color as the matrix of the bead. No outline is visible. The additional plaques are two round florets with two green and two red triangles facing toward the center, all of them outlined in yellow. There is a fine trail around them, giving the impression that they were not perfectly flush with the green surface.

534.20

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of blue glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. There is a zone of anthemia: three palmettes with five red leaves set in white and outlined in a fine yellow; three lotus flowers with the yellow central stem capped in red; and two flaring blue petals, standing on two spiraling stems. There are no additional plaques.

534.21

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of green glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible, onto which the two bands are applied. There are four faces set in a fine white and a wide blue field. There are no additional plaques.

534.22

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of green glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. There are three faces rendered with more detail, extending to the bust (possibly with necklaces, but more probably a rendering of the neck with two horizontal lines). The bust is framed by a circular wreath, which is red, and the leaves are green, appearing similar to laurel leaves. The additional plaques are rectangular florets with a central vertical red band flanked by two green bands.

534.23

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. There are four faces set in a blue square, which is set in a white lozenge, which is set in a blue square field. Three of them face the viewer while the fourth is upside down. There are no additional plaques.

534.24

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. The base mass is red, and the two bands are part of it; onto this was applied the central green band. There are two faces set freely in the green background without any outline, both set off-axis. The additional plaques are two disks, each divided into segments of green and red, separated by a thin yellow line.

534.25

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of red glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. There are four faces, each set in a round white and a square blue frame, set in a larger white lozenge, set in a dark blue square. There are no additional plaques.

534.26

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of green glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. There are three faces, each set in a round white and a square blue frame. The additional plaques are three square tiles; in each one, set in translucent dark blue field, there are two yellow, one green, and one red triangles, all facing toward the center.

534.27

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of green glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. In the thread hole, it can be seen that the green bands were added onto the finished central band; part of the back side of the floral floret is visible. There are three faces with short dark blue hair, set in a lighter blue square frame. The additional plaques are two square tiles. In each one are placed four trilobe leaves, green outlined in yellow facing outward, the upper two downward and the lower two upward, forming a lozenge-like void area in the center of the tile. They are set in one blue and one red layer of glass.

534.28

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of green glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. In the thread hole, it can be seen that there is a multicolored banded mass behind the central band of the florets; quite probably this is the distorted back side of the mosaic sections. What is visible, though, are alternating fine rows of red and blue. There are three Medusa heads with short, sleek hair all around the face. They are set in a fine round white frame, set in a larger, square blue field. The additional plaques are three square tiles. In each one are set, in a translucent dark blue field, two yellow, one green, and one red triangles, all facing toward the center.

534.29

The upper and lower parts of the bead are opaque white, possibly weathered green. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. Inside the thread hole, it can be seen that the back side of the mosaic sections slid toward the upper opening of the hole and was covered by the single-colored band. There are three Medusa heads set in a fine round white frame, set in a larger, square blue field. The additional plaques are three square tiles. In each one are set, in a translucent dark blue field, two yellow, one green, and one red triangles, all facing toward the center.

534.30

The upper and lower parts of the bead are made of blue glass. There is no base mass, and the back side of the mosaic sections is visible. The two bands are applied onto this surface. Inside the thread hole, it can be seen that the back side of the mosaic sections slid toward the upper opening of the hole and was covered by the single-colored band. There are three female busts with long hair and necklaces, set in green outlines. The additional plaques are checkerboard: four rows of red lozenges at the center, flanked on either side by a white, a yellow, and another white row of lozenges, which are framed by a row of red triangular tesserae pointing toward the interior of the plaque.
