---
label: "434"
title: "Jar with Bronze Handle"
layout: entry
order: 2003
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-434"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. Weathering has caused iridescence on the inside and around the mouth. The bronze wire is weathered, appearing greenish, and the hoop around the neck is broken.

## Description

Flaring, fire-polished, rounded rim; short, funnel mouth; wide, convex shoulder, ending in a horizontal bulge, below which the body gradually tapers toward the flat, slightly concave bottom. A solid relief pontil scar (W. 1 cm) is visible at the center of the bottom.

A twisted bronze wire, wound around the neck, forms a hoop—now an open ring—from which two figure-eight-shaped loops are suspended; the bent ends of the long, horseshoe-shaped handle pass through these two loops. Each loop is made of a ring, pushed in to form two oval eyelets and then folded again, bringing the eyelets next to each other and thus forming a loop.

## Comparanda

Small-sized jars of similar shape and quality are known from excavations at Fustat, the center of medieval Cairo in Egypt ({% cite 'Scanlon and Pinder-Wilson 2001' %}, pp. 50–51, type 22b), dated in the ninth–eleventh centuries; also, see a jar at the Corning Museum of Glass ({% cite 'Whitehouse 2014' %}, pp. 42–43, nos. 656–658) dated between the ninth and eleventh centuries CE, and another at the Newark Museum ({% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 229, no. 518). For a similar miniature, but more open vessel form from Sabra al-Mansuriyya, Tunisia cf. {% cite 'Foy 2020' %}, form Sb16. Also, for the general form see {% cite 'Lamm 1930' %}, plate 3:24.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 206, no. 579.

## Exhibitions

None