---
label: "181"
title: "Head Jug"
layout: entry
order: 562
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-181"
---

## Condition

Intact; some areas iridescent and others covered with incrustation.

## Description

Cracked-off, everted rim; broad, conical neck, tapering toward the body; mold-blown head-shaped body; flat bottom. Body in form of youthful, clean-shave male head, with straight long hair to the nape of neck and fringe of twelve vertical locks over the forehead. Large, almond-shaped eyes with pronounced pupils staring toward the figure’s upper right side; soft eyebrows; straight wide nose; small mouth with full lips; round chin; large ears. Conical base formed of three and a half revolutions of a thick trail. A wishbone strap handle is applied to mid-neck in a large pad, drawn out and up, forming a horizontal part that was tooled into a thumb-rest tab, with acute angle below and drawn vertically down to the upper part of the head’s back, and trailed off down to base, with decoration of 18 horizontal ribs notched between lower attachment and bottom. The handle and the base are made of a different type of glass, seemingly opaque “black” glass, possibly dark green. Made in a two-part, mold with open base—as evidenced by the plain, rough surface of the undersurface of the body. No pontil mark on the bottom. Vertical mold seam behind the ears incorporated in the hair, visible only on the left side of the vessel.

## Comments and Comparanda

Head-shaped glass vessels represent the shape of a human head in the round or of two (known as janiform) or multiple heads arranged back-to-back. They are mold-blown, almost exclusively blown in molds with two vertical parts. Predominantly they are shaped as bottles or flasks, occasionally with one or two handles, jugs, and a few are cups made only as single heads. They first appear in the early first century CE, in the late Augustan era, probably in the eastern Mediterranean, and the earlier forms are jugs and one-handled flasks. In the first century they were produced in the eastern Mediterranean and probably Italy as well, during the second and third centuries they were predominantly made on the Syro-Palestinian coast, from the third century they become common in northwestern Europe and during the fourth century they were produced in Germany and Gaul. They render heads of deities, like Dionysus, Livia-Juno, a chubby curly child, probably Eros or Dionysus, and mythological creatures like Medusa; unusual and ethnic faces, e.g., grotesques or Ethiopians, and finally, heads of ordinary Caucasian people—the last one appearing only northwestern provinces in third–fourth centuries. Dionysus and the chubby curly child appear mostly in the eastern Mediterranean, Medusa in both east and west, and ethnic types, grotesques and ordinary people predominantly in Italy and the northwestern European provinces ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 93–94, forms 78a, 78b; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 201–215). On janiform unguentaria see {% cat '2003.325' %} and {% cite 'Antonaras 2009' %}, pp. 324–326, form 146 = {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 163–164. For jugs in the shape of ordinary heads see {% cite 'Antonaras 2009' %}, pp. 256–257, form 96 = {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 129–130.

Flasks {% cat '2004.44' %} and belong to a well-defined group of head flasks, from a workshop creating products all made of a distinctive cobalt-blue translucent glass ({% cite 'Harden et al. 1987' %}, p. 175, no. 96; {% cite 'Whitehouse 1997b' %}, p. 370; {% cite 'Lightfoot 2020' %}, pp. 83–84). All these flasks present, with small differences, as the head of a clean-shaven youth with large, almond-shaped eyes and well-arranged, flowing locks that are typical of late Roman portraiture. The workshop produced free-, dip mold–, and mold-blown vessels, which all had an applied coil base and the handles are wishbone-shaped, drawn down from the neck to the body, often pinched ({% cite 'Harden et al. 1987' %}, p. 175, no. 96; {% cite 'Whitehouse 1997b' %}, pp. 367–375; {% cite 'Lightfoot 2020' %}, pp. 83–93). For direct parallels see {% cite 'Harden et al. 1987' %}, p. 175, no. 96; {% cite 'Platz-Horster 1976' %}, p. 45, no. 70; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, pp. 74–76, no. 548; {% cite 'Whitehouse 1997b' %}, pp. 367, 370, 374, plate 1; {% cite 'Lightfoot 2020' %}, pp. 83–93, esp. 83–84.

## Provenance

By 1981, Private Collection (Switzerland); 1985, Ernst Kofler, 1899–1989 and Marthe Truniger, 1918–1999 (Lucerne, Switzerland); 1985, Private Collection \[sold, Ancient Glass: Formerly the Kofler-Truniger Collection, Christie’s, London, March 5–6, 1985, lot 86, to Mansour Gallery\]; 1985, Mansour Gallery (London, England), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1985

## Bibliography

{% cite '3000 Jahre Glaskunst' %}, pp. 5 and 84, no. 290.

{% cite 'Fischer 1985' %}, p. 398.

{% cite 'Christie’s 1985' %}, lot 86.

{% cite 'JPGM Acquisitions 1985' %}, p. 196, no. 70.

{% cite 'Drury 1986' %}, p. 101.

{% cite 'Whitehouse 1997b' %}, p. 370, appendix: no. A3.

{% cite '*JPGM Handbook Antiquities* 1st ed.' %}, p. 209.

{% cite '*JPGM Handbook Antiquities* rev. ed.' %}, p. 219.

## Exhibitions

Ancient Art from the Permanent Collection (Los Angeles, 1999–2004)

Reflecting Antiquity: Modern Glass Inspired by Ancient Rome (Malibu, 2007–2008; Corning, 2008)