---
label: "185"
title: "Jug"
layout: entry
order: 566
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-185"
---

## Condition

Intact; milky incrustation over parts of the body.

## Description

Fire-polished, rounded rim, pinched to form a trefoil mouth; short, wide, cylindrical neck; cylindrical body with overhanging horizontal shoulder; flat bottom, slightly indented at center. Body covered with 27 mold-blown vertical ribs. A thick, greenish coil is wound 11 times spirally from under the mouth to the center of the bottom. An almost vertical, smooth strap handle made of greenish glass is applied on the shoulder, drawn upward and then inward, forming a thumb rest at top and attached on the upper part of the neck up to the tip of the rim. The whole vessel is badly executed and lopsided. On the bottom a round wad of greenish glass (W. 1.4 cm) where the pontil was attached renders the vessel unstable.

## Comments and Comparanda

Mold-blown cylindrical jugs with vertical ribs are known from Syro-Palestinian sites dated to the fourth century, and this fashion continues into the sixth century CE. The purple color of the body and the combination with the greenish handle is more common in the fourth century ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 265–266). The closest parallel, which is unprovenanced, is in the Princeton University Art Museum ({% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 96–97, no. 116). Quite similar but slightly different jugs are the following: {% cite 'von Saldern 1980b' %}, p. 68, no. 60; {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 283, no. 148; {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, p. 380, no. 1012 (all examples are slightly different). Further, the following jugs are comparable: {% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, p. 113, nos. 428–431; {% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 209, no. 391; {% cite 'Hizmi 1997' %}, p. 45, fig. 6:18; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 181, no. 722; {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 184, no. 218; {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2011' %}, p. 380, no. 1012. For very similar vessels with plain rim, see {% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 203, no. 148, with further bibliography.

## Provenance

1979, Edwin A. Lipps, 1922–1988 (Pacific Palisades, California), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1979

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None
