---
label: "184"
title: "Grape Jug"
layout: entry
order: 565
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-184"
---

## Condition

A fill has been added on the shoulder. Incrustation on the body.

## Description

In-folded, flaring trefoil rim sharply bent downward; conical neck, wider toward the body; flat shoulder; conical body in the shape of a grape bunch with seven rows of grapes. An applied coil wound one-and-a-half times forms the base-ring on the bottom. A colorless strap handle tooled into three ridges, applied on the shoulder, and drawn up to the rim, where it forms an overhanging thumb rest.

## Comments and Comparanda

This jug belongs to a group of mold-blown vessels that render in a naturalistic fashion fruits like dates, pomegranates, and cedar and pine cones. Grape flasks are known in three different variants, appearing in three distinct periods of Roman times ({% cite 'Moirin and Arveiller-Dulong 2010' %}). The oldest examples reproduce the bunch with greater naturalism, as {% cat '2003.330' %} and {% cat '2003.331' %} ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, p. 94, form 78e; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 142–143, form 118); they appear as early as the third quarter of the first century and they continue into the early second century, and it has been assumed that they are Syro-Palestinian products ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 180). The later examples, like {% cat '2003.329' %}, are dated to the end of the second century, and render the grape more schematically. Two-handled examples appear particularly in the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire—probably locally produced there—in addition to the handleless variant that prevails in the east ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 108–109, form 91a; {% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 190–191, no. 119, with detailed bibliography). In addition, a single-handled blue jug is known from Cologne, now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art that may be the closer parallel for the jug 2003.332 ({% cite 'Fremersdorf 1961' %}, p. 70, plate 141). Finally, there is a third subgroup comprising vessels with body modeled like a grape bunch standing on a discoid base. They are mainly found, and were probably made in, the Syro-Palestinian region, and they are ascribed to the third century based on stylistic features ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, pp. 191–195, nos. 120–128).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 174, no. 474.

{% cite 'Lierke 2009' %}, p. 23, ill. [erroneously ascribed to the sixth BCE production].

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)