---
label: "187"
title: "Oinochoe"
layout: entry
order: 568
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-187"
---

## Condition

Intact; the entire vessel is covered with iridescent weathering and incrustation over parts of the body.

## Description

Flaring rim, partly in-folded tubular and partly left fire-polished; conical mouth; short, cylindrical neck, widening toward the body; cylindrical body with mildly overhanging shoulder; flat bottom, slightly indented at center. Body covered with 35 mold-blown vertical ribs. Irregular remains of a pontil mark (W. ca. 2.8) are visible on the bottom. Smooth, vertical, angular, strap handle from shoulder to rim.

## Comments and Comparanda

Mold-blown cylindrical jugs with vertical ribs are known from Syro-Palestinian sites dated in the fourth century, and this fashion continues into the sixth century CE ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, pp. 265–266; {% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 184). The closest parallels are in the Princeton University Art Museum ({% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, pp. 96–97, no. 117); Newark Museum ({% cite 'Auth 1976' %}, p. 209, no. 391); the Royal Ontario Museum ({% cite 'Hayes 1975' %}, p. 113, nos. 428–31, plate 27); Israel Museum ({% cite 'Israeli 2003' %}, p. 184, no. 218); and Württemberg State Museum ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 281, no. 146). Quite close but slightly different jugs are the following: {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, pp. 96–97, no, 118; {% cite 'von Saldern 1980b' %}, p. 68, no. 60; {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, p. 380, no. 1012; {% cite 'Hizmi 1997' %}, p. 128, 45*, fig. 6:18; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 181, no. 722.

## Provenance

1971, Royal Athena Galleries (New York, New York), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1971

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None