---
label: "580"
title: "Bleeding Cup"
layout: entry
order: 2311
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-580"
---

## Condition

Broken spout, preserved body iridescent from weathering.

## Description

Fire-polished, rounded rim, slightly flaring upper part; cylindrical body, tapering toward the convex bottom; a scar of a solid pontil (W. 1 cm) at the center. An applied spout at the upper part of the body that internally appears to be a continuous mass of glass. The spout was curved toward the bottom of the bowl.

Glass bleeding cups were in use from the Roman period through the Byzantine era. Mentioned by the fourth-century CE Greek physician Oribasius—and according to information repeated in the seventh century by the great Byzantine physician Paulus Aegineta—glass bleeding cups were useful because physicians could check the volume of blood they were letting ([[Antonaras 2010b]], pp. 389–390). During the same period they were widely used in Islamic lands, as they still are until today in traditional medicine in eastern Mediterranean and Middle Eastern lands ([[Lamm 1930]], p. 33, plates 2:13–14; [[Lane 1937]], p. 66, fig. 10T; [[Hasson 1979]], p. 5, fig. 1–2; [[Oliver 1980]], p. 142, no. 246; [[Abdullaev, Rtveladze, and Shishkina 1991]], p. 152, no. 642; [[Kröger 1995]], pp. 186–188, nos. 239–243, esp. 239–240; [[Carboni 2001]], pp. 144–145, cat. nos. 34b, c; [[Scanlon and Pinder-Wilson 2001]], pp. 56–59, nos. 29a–g, fig. 29, from an eighth–ninth-century context). What distinguishes bleeding cups from the relatively similar alembic cups is that their body is cylindrical and not so much conical and that the spout, in order to facilitate physician’s maneuvering, is turned toward the bottom and not to the opening of the vessel. There is one case where bleeding cups were unearthed in an alchemist’s workshop in conjunction with spheroconical clay vessels, and assumed altogether to comprise alembics, but that should be considered as a solution driven by lack of actual alembic’s domes or by a special distilling technique or product ([[Valiulina 2005]], pp. 44–47, figs. 15–17, 41 from twelfth–thirteenth-century contexts).

## Provenance

1979, Edwin A. Lipps, 1922–1988 (Pacific Palisades, California), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1979

## Bibliography

Unpublished

## Exhibitions

None