---
label: "572"
title: "Pin"
layout: entry
order: 2241
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-572"
---

## Condition

Intact; covered with iridescent weathering.

## Description

Smooth glass rod, circular in cross section, pointed at one end and with a conical head at the other.

## Comments and Comparanda

Glass pins are a rare find. They are similar to so-called stirring rods (see [2003.403](#cat)), which have a tiny disc on one end and a vessel or animal on the other, if not bent into a closed ring; almost always their cylindrical shaft is twisted ([[Isings 1957]], pp. 94–95, form 79; [[Antonaras 2017]], pp. 166–167, form 148). They are even closer to twisted rods, pointed at one end and decorated with vessel or animal on the other end, identified as distaffs ([[Gojković 2015]], pp. 267–268) and glass needles ([[Antonaras 2017]], pp. 166–167, form 148D).

Glass pins like 2003.404 recall the ancient Greek [kalamis]{.underline} (καλαμίς) or the Latin [discerniculum]{.underline}, that is, a long, thin object used by women to divide the locks of their hair to arrange a complicated hairstyle, thereby identifying it with a rare kind of hairpin ([Oxford Latin Dictionary]{.underline}, s.v. “discerniculum”; Liddell and Scott, s.v. “καλαμίς”). For finds of this type, see [[Davaras 1985]], p. 201; [[Platz-Horster 1976]], p. 82, no. 166; [[Barkóczi 1996]], p. 106, no. 341; [[Mandruzzato et al. 2008]], p. 53, no. 34).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 215, no. 621.

## Exhibitions

None