---
label: "438"
title: "Pseudo Vetro d’Oro Medallion"
layout: entry
order: 2022
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-438"
---

## Condition

The rim is heavily chipped. A large fragment was reattached.

## Description

Disc made of colorless, blue, and gold glass. The circular body is slightly convex. In its center, a standing female figure drawn on gold leaf wears a long tunic and an elaborate headdress. She opens her arms in a gesture of prayer. Gold inscriptions flank her. A wide gold vine with tendrils set between two bands encircles the scene. The rim is heavily chipped. A large fragment was reattached.

At the center of the underside the circular scar of a solid pontil (W. 0.7 cm) is visible.

The glassblower made a small plate of dark blue glass, which was {% def 'anneal' 'annealed' %}; later a gold foil was applied to it, which was cut and incised to form the desired representation. This was reheated and a transparent bubble of glass was blown onto it, which formed the interior bottom and walls of the bowl. In addition, a coil of colorless glass was wound around the disk, forming a coil base for the vessel. The base coil is pressed along its center where a horizontal groove is formed. creating the illusion that it consists of two different coils, the upper thicker and the lower finer.

Inscription: On the left of the figure: BELUCIA / FEDELISSSIMA / VIRCO / IN PACE/ IIIIX / CALENDAS / BENTURAS / SEPTEM/BRES /. On the right of the figure: OVE VIXYT / ANNOS / XVIII.

## Comments and Comparanda

This disk is a replica of well-known late antique vetri d’oro or gold-glass medallions and bowls. (On the ancient gold glass objects see {% cite 'Pillinger 1984' %}. For a recent, updated overview of this production and the examples in the rich collection of the British Museum see {% cite 'Howells 2015' %}.)

There are several known examples of these replicas, made and sold in Italy during the late nineteenth century that today are part of museum collections. (For a general overview on these objects as a group see {% cite 'Pillinger 1984' %}, pp. 15–26; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2007' %}, pp. 19–23.) Characteristic examples include those in the British Museum collection ({% cite 'Howells 2015' %}, pp. 146–152), the University Art Gallery ({% cite 'Matheson 1980' %}, pp. 142–144), and the Corning Museum of Glass ({% cite 'Whitehouse 1994' %}, pp. 133–135).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'Elbern 1967' %}.

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 142, no. 400, ill.

## Exhibitions

-   Reflecting Antiquity: Modern Glass Inspired by Ancient Rome (Malibu, 2007–2008; Corning, 2008)