---
label: "508"
title: "Fish-Shaped Appliqué / Conchylienbecher (shell beaker)"
layout: entry
order: 2117
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-508"
nextPage: /catalogue/b_miscellanea/i_ancient/2_jewelry/1_beads/
---

## Condition

Fragment.

## Description

Appliqué in the shape of a fish. The mouth forms the opening, and there is a large dorsal fin with vertical striations separately applied. The end of the tail has broken off. On the back side of the fish’s body is visible the scar from the point that connected the appliqué to the vessel.

## Comments and Comparanda

This appliqué belongs to a type of cup, known as conchylia cups, that was decorated with three or four rows of fish, shells, and other sea creatures. These faced left, like this example, or more rarely vertically (on the class see {% cite 'Doppelfeld 1973' %}; {% cite 'Doppelfeld 1976' %}). Three of the known examples were found in Cologne ({% cite 'Fremersdorf 1961' %}, pp. 23–24, plate 15 and pp. 26–27, plate 21; {% cite 'Doppelfeld 1973' %}, pp. 281–283, figs. 1–3; {% cite '*Glass from the Ancient World* 1957' %}, p. 255, no. 144), one from Trier ({% cite 'Goethert-Polaschek 1977' %}, pp. 63–64, no. 241, and p. 319, tomb 252, plate 24), and one from Rome ({% cite 'Fremersdorf 1975' %}, pp. 72–73, no. 706, plate 32). Single fish have been found around the Mediterranean, such as at Corinth ({% cite 'Davidson 1952' %}, p. 98, no. 619, plate 54; {% cite 'Antonaras 2022' %}, pp. 52, 98, no. 201) and on Crete ({% cite 'Price 1992' %}, pp. 428, 447, no. 160); others were purchased in eastern Mediterranean cities, such as Cairo ({% cite '*Glass from the Ancient World* 1957' %}, p. 163, no. 336; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, p. 237, no. 824) and Tyre ({% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2005' %}, no. 981), and yet another, unprovenanced one has been published ({% cite 'Schlick-Nolte 2002' %}, p. 102, no. V-64). They are considered to be products of the region of Cologne or Trier, and of another production center on the Mediterranean. The few of them that can be dated independently are placed at the end of the third–early fourth century CE.

The fact that several single fish appliqués have been unearthed as isolated finds in excavation indicates that once they were separated from the body of the vessel they were kept and repurposed, probably as amulets ({% cite 'Stern 2001' %}, p. 141).

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 215, no. 623.

## Exhibitions

None