---
label: "459"
title: "Fragment of a Plaque"
layout: entry
order: 2068
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-459"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved. Small part of one edge is missing. There is some discoloration around the edges.

## Description

A rectangular mosaic plaque fragment decorated with a pattern of four-petaled flowers set in opaque red glass, with white petals, outlined in turquoise, around yellow centers. Each tessera consists of two of the petals and the yellow central dot. The ends of the tesserae of each row were placed between the lower row’s tesserae, thus forming in a loose manner the pattern of the flower.

The decoration runs through the entire plaque and is clear on the back side too.

One of the sides is mildly curved, apparently meant to be the edge of the original band or decorative motif. The other three sides are vertical, with the lowest 0.2 cm on the bottom edge beveled, which would have facilitated the juxtaposition of similar rectangular plaques.

The quatrefoil motif was used for millennia in ancient Egypt in connection with the goddesses Isis and Nephthys, represented also on mummy-shaped divine figures and on beaded mummy nets. In the Ptolemaic period it was translated into mosaic glass. It appears that originally it represented stars and not flowers. In only a few cases, like in the example from JPGM, do the quatrefoils have a yellow central rod, probably recalling the central gold nail of ancient cloisonné work ({% cite 'Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994' %}, p. 400, no. 143).

This piece was probably part of a garment of a figurine, given the motif and the curved side, as in {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2011' %}, p. 380, no. 618.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the historical and technological evolution of glass inlays in Pharaonic Egypt and the Roman Empire, see comments on {% cat '2003.260' %}. For close parallels, see {% cite 'Goldstein 1979' %}, pp. 218–219, nos. 627, 630; {% cite 'Müller 1964' %}, p. 144, no. A 199a (formerly Kofler-Truniger Collection). For the same motif without the central yellow rod: {% cite 'Stern and Schlick-Nolte 1994' %}, pp. 400–401, no. 143; {% cite 'Platz-Horster 2002' %}, pp. 149–150, fig. 6; {% cite 'Arveiller-Dulong and Nenna 2011' %}, p. 380, no. 617; {% cite 'Antonaras 2012' %}, p. 291, no. 489.

## Provenance

Pierre Mavrogordato, Greek, 1870–1948 (Berlin, Germany); by 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his daughter, Ingrid Reisser, 1988; 1988–2004, Ingrid Reisser (Böblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2004

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 132, no. 361.

## Exhibitions

None