---
label: "148"
title: "Jar"
layout: entry
order: 461
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-148"
---

## Condition

Mended; small fill on the bottom; weathering on the interior.

## Description

Fire-polished, flaring rim; wide, short neck; pear-shaped body; slightly concave bottom. Free-blown ribbon jar of eight alternating vertical lengths of two composite canes: four are dark blue and four turquoise (appearing purplish in transmitted light), each one of them flanked by translucent white glass. All three canes begin on one side of the rim and continue down and around to terminate at the same point on the other side of the rim. The canes were assembled and thereafter free-blown to achieve the shape.

## Comments and Comparanda

Slumped and blown color-band vessels represent a separate family of mosaic glass. These vessels are small- or medium-sized flasks or unguentaria. They are made of bands or sections of mosaic canes that were fused to a mass, which was gathered toward the end of the production on the blowpipe, and it was formed using free-blowing. This development is very important for the history of glassworking, because it illustrates the transition from the earlier, Hellenistic and Roman technique of forming glass vessels by slumping a mass of glass over or into a mold to the free-blowing that revolutionized the entire glass industry and dates to the Augustan to Julio-Claudian period. The distribution pattern of provenanced finds indicates that the production center was probably in the western Mediterranean, possibly in Italy ({% cite 'Grose 1989' %}, pp. 261–262).

Small globular and pear-shaped glass jars were popular in the first century CE, mostly made with the free-blowing technique ({% cite 'Isings 1957' %}, pp. 88–89, variants of forms 68; {% cite 'Fünfschilling 2015' %}, p. 391, forms AR 114, AR 115; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, p. 131–132, forms 98, 99). Jar 2003.277 has the same shape as the aforementioned monochrome vessels, but it is rendered in a different technique that led to the striking, polychrome creation.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 132, no. 363.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)