---
label: "155"
title: "Flask"
layout: entry
order: 468
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-155"
---

## Condition

Mended. Neck repaired with resin. Some areas of iridescence on the body. Internal surface partly covered with a light-colored material.

## Description

Cylindrical neck; globular body; flat, slightly concave bottom.

The vessel is made of three different types of composite canes which were fused together and blown: (1) cane comprised of horizontal sections of amber and white stripes; (2) cane comprised of three blue and four white vertical stripes; (3) cane comprised of three purple and four white vertical stripes. In total nine composite canes are used, cane no. 1 two times, cane no. 2 four times, and cane no. 3 three times, arranged in the following order: 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 2. It seems that the intention of the glassworker was to arrange every type of cane three times, but either a shortage of material or a mistake altered one of the canes. In some areas different canes are superimposed and the different motifs are visible one over the other.

## Comparanda

On slumped and blown vessels see comments on {% cat '2003.277' %}, {% cite 'Whitehouse 1997a' %}, pp. 39–40, no. 34. For other slumped and blown polychrome vessels see comparanda for {% cat '2003.275' %}.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 128, no. 341.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)