---
label: "136"
title: "Lidded Pyxis"
layout: entry
order: 425
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-136"
---

## Condition

Intact.

## Description

Vertical, rounded rim, ground back to create a narrow ledge on which the lid sits. Deep cylindrical body, flat bottom.

On the upper side of the lid are two concentric cut grooves, a smaller central one, 1.3 cm, and a wider one, 3.6 cm, towards the edge. A fine, horizontal groove is cut on the body, right below the ledge of the rim.

Composite mosaic pattern formed from polygonal sections of a composite cane of amber-colored glass in which a fine, opaque white thread was spiraled. The sections were fused together and tooled into a single mass, which was slumped over a former mold and further tooled to the desired shape.

## Comments and Comparanda

For the production technique see comments on [85.AF.85](#num). On the trade of small fragments of mosaic glass in nineteenth-century Rome and on the different techniques and classes of mosaic glass present in the JPGM collection, see comments on [76.AF.70.21](#num). On agate and marbled vessels see comments on [2003.253](#num) and [72.AF.37](#num). For direct comparanda see [[Grose 1989]], pp. 239, 335, no. 587.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 123, no. 330; p. 124, plate no. 330.

## Exhibitions

-   Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)

-   Art of Alchemy (Los Angeles, 2016–2017)
