---
label: "208"
title: "Cylindrical Jug/Flask"
layout: entry
order: 615
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-208"
---

## Condition

The surface presents small patches of iridescence and pitting. The upper part was reattached to the body with large fills.

## Description

Flaring, in-folded, and flattened tubular rim; cylindrical neck mildly constricted at its base; convex sloping shoulder; cylindrical body, convex lower part; flat bottom. One bifurcated strap handle with an elbow made of two layers of glass, dark blue on the upper side and turquoise on the lower, has been applied on the shoulder and drawn up to the lip, where it forms a vertical tab.

The mold-blown decoration consists of a frieze of 29 down-turned flutes on the shoulder and a frieze of 29 upturned identical flutes on the lower part of the body. The central, cylindrical part of the body is bordered on the upper part by a raised ridge and on the lower part by two ridges. The ivy frieze on the central part conceals the seams of the mold. On each mold section is a pair of horizontal twigs with two pairs of heart-shaped ivy leaves intertwined in a knot at the center of the panel. On the bottom are three raised concentric rings surrounding a central boss, the outer ring forming a base-ring 2.4 cm in diameter.

## Comments and Comparanda

This piece belongs to a variant of a well-known type of mold-blown vessel, all of which are finished as jugs, except of [2003.313](#num), which is an amphoriskos ([[Harden 1944]], pp. 84–86, 292; [[Stern 1995]], pp. 116–168, nos. 75–77 with all bibliography). Several finds originate from the Syro-Palestinian region, where they were quite probably produced [[Harden 1944]], pp. 84–85, 292; [[Israeli 1964]], pp. 36–37, nos. 4a–b, figs. 6–7). Most of them are decorated with an open wreath of ivy, grape, and olive. This particular variant bears a continuous frieze of ivy spays. Published parallels include the following: [[Platz-Horster 1976]], p. 40, no. 59; [[3000 Jahre Glaskunst]], p. 78, no. 250; [[Christie’s 1985]], p. 65, no. 105; [[Stern 1995]], pp. 168–169, no. 77.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 158, no. 442.

[[Stern 1995]], p. 169 n. 1a.

## Exhibitions
