---
label: "167"
title: "Cup"
layout: entry
order: 529
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-167"
---

## Condition

Mended. Minor chipping on the rim, filled.

## Description

Flaring rim, with unworked, slightly everted lip; short and wide neck; calyx-shaped body; and flat bottom, with three concentric raised circles around a central recessed knob. An inscription in capital Greek runs around the vessel at greatest diameter in a frieze flanked by three ridges above and two below. It reads: ΕΥΦΡΑΙΝΟΥ ΕΦΩ ΠΑΡΕΙ, *euphrainou epho parei* (“rejoice with what you are present in”). A frieze of 35 upturned tongues in raised outline covers the lower part of the body.

There are two variants of this type of vessel distinguished by the contour of the walls and the relation of the height to the diameter. This one belongs to the taller, slender variant with three ridges above the inscription ({% cite 'Harden 1935' %}, group G1ii). Roughly ten examples have been noted throughout the Mediterranean, but it is accepted, partly because of the disk-shaped base section of the mold and the distribution pattern, that they were quite probably produced along the Syro-Palestinian coast ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 97, no. 1 with detailed bibliography and comments; {% cite 'Whitehouse 2001a' %}, pp. 23–24, nos. 487–488; {% cite 'Antonaras 2017' %}, pp. 68–69, form 19).

The inscription has been interpreted in different ways but the most convincing is the one that considers it an abbreviated form of ΕΥΦΡΑΙΝΟΥ ΕΠΙ ΤΟΥΤΩΙ ΕΦΩΙ ΠΑΡΕΙ. This phrase, which partly appears in the New Testament (Matthew 26:50: ‘Ἑταῖρε ἐφ’ ᾧ πάρει), translates as “Rejoice with what you are present” ({% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 97). Pseudo-Zonaras, lexicon, s.v. ‘Ἐφ’ ᾧ πάρει, 928, line 14. For the possibility that there is an Epicurean connotation in the inscription, see {% cite 'Fontaine and Margos 2010' %}, pp. 80–83.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

{% cite '*JGS* 1971' %}, pp. 134–135, no. 7.

{% cite 'von Saldern et al. 1974' %}, p. 159, no. 447.

{% cite 'Stern 1995' %}, p. 98 n. 5 g

## Exhibitions

None