---
label: "159"
title: "Janiform Cup"
layout: entry
order: 521
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-159"
---

## Condition

Intact. Some incrustation and iridescence, mostly in the interior.

## Description

Cut-off, uneven rim; convex neck; janiform body, that is, in the shape of two males, with youthful, clean-shaven faces placed back-to-back. Large, almond-shaped eyes; curved eyebrows; short straight nose; round cheeks; smiling mouth with full lips; round, small chin. Hair rendered as long wavy curls. Over the forehead a row of pronounced round curls, along with ivy berries, part of an ivy wreath. The heart-shaped ivy leaves are clearly rendered on the sides of heads, particularly visible on one of the faces.

Not entirely flat bottom, meaning not all of it rests on the surface on which the object sits. On the base is a central disk and a ring near the periphery, both recessed.

## Comparanda

On head-shaped glass vessels see comments on {% cat '2003.326' %}. Cups are an underrepresented form among these vessels, which are usually finished as bottles and flasks, and almost all of the cups are single heads, unlike the janiform 2003.474. Because of the ivy wreathes, the male faces can be associated with Dionysus or Antinous with features of Dionysus. A characteristic example of a head flask of Antinous as Dionysus is {% cat '2003.326' %}, where several comparanda are cited.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[[JGS]{.underline} 1978]], p. 119, no. 6.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)