---
label: "168"
title: "Cup"
layout: entry
order: 530
presentation: side-by-side
# toc: false
menu: false
object:
  - id: "cat-168"
---

## Condition

Fully preserved; small part of the rim missing.

## Description

Cut-off rim, conical neck with mildly convex walls; squat, globular body; flat bottom. A wavy tendril running between two horizontal ridges encircles the neck. On the shoulder 13 trefoil arches, each one containing two smaller arches, flanked by vertical, Y-shaped bars. On the mildly convex central part of the body a frieze of vertical ribs is flanked by two horizontal ridges, followed lower by a smooth band and two more ridges before the final curving to the bottom. Two raised concentric circles form base-rings and at the center of the bottom is a recess.

## Comments and Comparanda

Probably connected to the group of vessels with pronounced shoulder—mostly ribbed bowls and a few truncated beakers with diamond-shaped bosses—that are considered western products of the mid-first century CE ([[Stern 1995]], pp. 110–111, no. 12). There is also one ovoid cup in this group, which has on the upper body a similar “floral and foliage spray,” at the middle a EYΦΡΑΙΝΟΥ ΕΦΩ ΠΑΡΕΙ inscription, and lower godroons (tongues); see [[Price 1991]], p. 61 plate XVII.b, having in common the floral scroll on the shoulder and the vertical ribbing on the body.

## Provenance

By 1974–1988, Erwin Oppenländer, 1901–1988 (Waiblingen, Germany), by inheritance to his son, Gert Oppenländer, 1988; 1988–2003, Gert Oppenländer (Waiblingen, Germany), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 2003

## Bibliography

[[von Saldern et al. 1974]], p. 160, no. 449.

## Exhibitions

Molten Color: Glassmaking in Antiquity (Malibu, 2005–2006; 2007; 2009–2010)
